ORIGINAL    PREFACE 


The  produce  of  the  earth — all  that  is  derived  from  its  surface  by 
the  united  application  of  labour,  machinery,  and  capital,  is 
divided  among  three  classes  of  the  community,  namely,  the 
proprietor  of  the  land,  the  owner  of  the  stock  or  capital  necessary 
for  its  cultivation,  and  the  labourers  by  whose  industry  it  is 
cultivated. 

But  in  different  stages  of  society,  the  proportions  of  the  whole 
produce  of  the  earth  which  will  be  allotted  to  each  of  these 
classes,  under  the  names  of  rent,  profit,  and  wages,  will  be 
essentially  different;  depending  mainly  on  the  actual  fertility 
of  the  soil,  on  the  accumulation  of  capital  and  population,  and 
on  the  skill,  ingenuity,  and  instruments  employed  in  agriculture. 

To  determine  the  laws  which  regulate  this  distribution  is  the 
principal  problem  in  Political  Economy:  much  as  the  science 
has  been  improved  by  the  writings  of  Turgot,  Stuart,  Smith, 
Say,  Sismondi,  and  others,  they  afford  very  little  satisfactory 
information  respecting  the  natural  course  of  rent,  profit,  and 
wages. 

In  1815,  Mr.  Malthus,  in  his  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and 
Progress  of  Rent,  and  a  Fellow  of  University  College,  Oxford, 
in  his  Essay  on  the  Application  of  Capital  to  Land,  presented  to 
the  world,  nearly  at  the  same  moment,  the  true  doctrine  of 
rent;  without  a  knowledge  of  which  it  is  impossible  to  under- 
stand the  effect  of  the  progress  of  wealth  on  profits  and  wages, 
or  to  trace  satisfactorily  the  influence  of  taxation  on  different 
classes  of  the  community;  particularly  when  the  commodities 
taxed  are  the  productions  immediately  derived  from  the  surface 
of  the  earth.  Adam  Smith,  and  the  other  able  writers  to  whom 
I  have  alluded,  not  having  viewed  correctly  the  principles  of 
rent,  have,  it  appears  to  me,  overlooked  many  important 
truths,  which  can  only  be  discovered  after  the  subject  of  rent 
is  thoroughly  understood. 

To  supply  this  deficiency,  abilities  are  required  of  a  far 
superior  cast  to  any  possessed  by  the  writer  of  the  following 
pages;  yet,  after  having  given  to  this  subject  his  best  considera- 

A 


2  Original  Preface 

tion — after  the  aid  which  he  has  derived  from  the  works  of  the 
above-mentioned  eminent  writers  —  and  after  the  valuable 
experience  which  a  few  late  years,  abounding  in  facts,  have 
yielded  to  the  present  generation — it  will  not,  he  trusts,  be 
deemed  presumptuous  in  him  to  state  his  opinions  on  the  laws 
of  profits  and  wages,  and  on  the  operation  of  taxes.  If  the 
principles  which  he  deems  correct  should  be  found  to  be  so, 
it  will  be  for  others,  more  able  than  himself,  to  trace  them  to 
all  their  important  consequences. 

The  writer,  in  combating  received  opinions,  has  found  it 
necessary  to  advert  more  particularly  to  those  passages  in  the 
writings  of  Adam  Smith  from  which  he  sees  reason  to  differ; 
but  he  hopes  it  will  not,  on  that  account,  be  suspected  that  he 
does  not,  in  common  with  all  those  who  acknowledge  the 
importance  of  the  science  of  Political  Economy,  participate  in 
the  admiration  which  the  profound  work  of  this  celebrated 
author  so  justly  excites. 

The  same  remark  may  be  applied  to  the  excellent  works  of 
M.  Say,  who  not  only  was  the  first,  or  among  the  first,  of  con- 
tinental writers  who  justly  appreciated  and  applied  the  principles 
of  Smith,  and  who  has  done  more  than  all  other  continental 
writers  taken  together  to  recommend  the  principles  of  that 
enlightened  and  beneficial  system  to  the  nations  of  Europe; 
but  who  has  succeeded  in  placing  the  science  in  a  more  logical 
and  more  instructive  order;  and  has  enriched  it  by  several 
discussions,  original,  accurate,  and  profound.^  The  respect, 
however,  which  the  author  entertains  for  the  writings  of  thii 
gentleman  has  not  prevented  him  from  commenting  with  tha^ 
freedom  which  he  thinks  the  interests  of  science  require,  oi 
such  passages  of  the  Economie  Politique  as  appeared  af 
variance  with  his  own  ideas. 

*  Chap.  XV.  Part  i.,  Dcs  Debouches,  contains,  in  particular,  some  vei 
important  principles,  which  I  believe  were  first  explained  by  tliis 
tinguished  writer. 


ADVERTISEMENT  TO  THE  THIRD  EDITION 

In  this  edition  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  more  fully  than 
in  the  last  my  opinion  on  the  difficult  subject  of  Value,  and 
for  that  purpose  have  made  a  few  additions  to  the  first  chapter. 
I  have  also  inserted  a  new  chapter  on  the  subject  of  Machinery, 
and  on  the  effects  of  its  improvement  on  the  interests  of  the 
different  classes  of  the  state.  In  the  chapter  on  the  Distinctive 
Properties  of  Value  and  Riches,  I  have  examined  the  doctrines 
of  M.  Say  on  that  important  question,  as  amended  in  the  fourth 
and  last  edition  of  his  work.  I  have  in  the  last  chapter  en- 
deavoured to  place  in  a  stronger  point  of  view  than  before  the 
doctrine  of  the  ability  of  a  country  to  pay  additional  money 
taxes,  although  the  aggregate  money  value  of  the  mass  of  its 
commodities  should  fall,  in  consequence  either  of  the  diminished 
quantity  of  labour  required  to  produce  its  com  at  home,  by 
improvements  in  its  husbandry,  or  from  its  obtaining  a  part 
of  its  corn  at  a  cheaper  price  from  abroad,  by  means  of  the 
exportation  of  its  manufactured  commodities.  This  considera- 
tion is  of  great  importance,  as  it  regards  the  question  of  the 
policy  of  leaving  unrestricted  the  importation  of  foreign  com, 
particularly  in  a  country  burthened  with  a  heavy  fixed  money 
taxation,  the  consequence  of  an  immense  National  Debt.  I 
have  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  ability  to  pay  taxes  depends, 
not  on  the  gross  money  value  of  the  mass  of  commodities,  nor 
on  the  net  money  value  of  the  revenues  of  capitalists  and  land- 
lords, but  on  the  money  value  of  each  man's  revenue  compared 
to  the  money  value  of  the  commodities  which  he  usually 
consumes. 

March  26,  1821, 


PRINCIPLES    OF    POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 


CHAPTER  I 

ON   VALUE 

SECTION  I 

The  value  of  a  commodity,  or  the  quantity  of  any  other  commodity  for 
which  it  will  exchange,  depends  on  the  relative  quantity  of  labour 
which  is  necessary  for  its  production,  and  not  on  the  greater  or  less 
compensation  which  is  paid  for  that  labour 

It  has  been  observed  by  Adam  Smith  that  "  the  word  Value 
has  two  different  meanings,  and  sometimes  expresses  the  utiHty 
of  some  particular  object,  and  sometimes  the  power  of  purchasing 
other  goods  which  the  possession  of  that  object  conveys.  The 
one  may  be  called  value  in  use  ;  the  other  value  in  exchange. 
The  things,"  he  Continues,  **  which  have  the  greatest  value  in 
use,  have  frequently  little  or  no  value  in  exchange;  and,  on  the 
contrary,  those  which  have  tlie  greatest  value  in  exchange, 
have  little  or  no  value  in  use."  Water  and  air  are  abundantly 
useful;  they  are  indeed  indispensable  to  existence,  yet,  under 
ordinary  circumstances,  nothing  can  be  obtained  in  exchange 
for  them.  Gold,  on  the  contrary,  though  of  little  use  compared 
with  air  or  water,  will  exchange  for  a  great  quantity  of  other 
goods. 

Utility  then  is  not  the  measure  of  exchangeable  value^ 
although  it  is  absolutely  essential  to  it.  If  a  commodlty^'were 
in  no  way  useful — in  other  words,  if  it  could  in  no  way  con- 
tribute to  our  gratification — it  would  be  destitute  of  exchange- 
able value,  however  scarce  it  might  be,  or  whatever  quantity 
of  labour  might  be  necessary  to  procure  it. 

Possessing  utility,  commodities  derive  their  exchangeable 
value  from  two  sources:  from  their  scarcity,  and  from  the 
quantity  of  labour  required  to  obtain  them. 

5 


6  Political  Economy 

There  are  some  commodities,  the  value  of  which  is  determined 
by  their  scarcity  alone.  No  labour  can  increase  the  quantity  of 
such  goods,  and  therefore  their  value  cannot  be  lowered  by  an 
increased  supply.  Some  rare  statues  and  pictures,  scarce  books 
and  coins,  wines  of  a  peculiar  quality,  which  can  be  made  only 
from  grapes  grown  on  a  particular  soil,  of  which  there  is  a  very 
limited  quantity,  are  all  of  this  description.  Their  value  is 
wholly  independent  of  the  quantity  of  labour  originally  necessary 
to  produce  them,  and  varies  with  the  varying  wealth  and 
inclinations  of  those  who  are  desirous  to  possess  them. 

These  commodities,  however,  form  a  ver>^  small  part  of  the 
mass  of  commodities  daily  exchanged  in  the  market.  By  far 
'^  the  greatest  part  of  those  goods  which  are  the  objects  of  desire 
are  procured  by  labour:  and  they  may  be  multiplied,  not  in 
one  country  alone,  but  in  many,  almost  without  any  assignable 
limit,  if  we  are  disposed  to  bestow  the  labour  necessary  to 
\    obtain  them. 

In  speaking,  then,  of  commodities,  of  their  exchangeable 
value,  and  of  the  laws  which  regulate  their  relative  prices,  we 
mean  always  such  commodities  only  as  can  be  increased  inj 
quantity  by  the  exertion  of  human  industry,  and  on  the  pro- 
duction of  which  competition  operates  without  restraint. 

In  the  early  stages  of  society,  the  exchangeable  value  of  these  j 
commodities,  or  the  rule  which  determines  how  much  of  one 
shall  be  given  in  exchange  for  another,  depends  almost  exclu- 
sively on  the  comparative  quantity  of  labour  expended  on  each. 

"The  real  price  of  everything,"  says  Adam  Smith,  "whatj 
everything  really  costs  to  the  man  who  wants  to  acquire  it,  is 
the  toil  and  trouble  of  acquiring  it.  What  everything  is  really 
worth  to  the  man  who  has  acquired  it,  and  who  wants  to  dispose ! 
of  it,  or  exchange  it  for  something  else,  is  the  toil  and  trouble 
which  it  can  save  to  himself,  and  which  it  can  impose  upon  other  j 
people."  "  Labour  was  the  first  price — the  original  purchase- 
money  that  was  paid  for  all  things."  Again,  "  in  that  early 
and  rude  state  of  society  which  precedes  both  the  accumulation 
of  stock  and  the  appropriation  of  land,  the  proportion  between 
the  quantities  of  labour  necessar\^  for  acquiring  different  objects 
seems  to  be  the  only  circumstance  which  can  afford  any  rule  for 
exchanging  them  for  one  another.  If,  among  a  nation  of  hunters, 
for  example,  it  usually  cost  twice  the  labour  to  kill  a  beaver 
which  it  does  to  kill  a  deer,  one  beaver  should  naturally  exchange 
.  for,  or  be  worth,  two  deer.  It  is  natural  that  what  is  usually 
the  produce  of  two  days"  or  two  hours'  labour  should  be  worth 


On  Value  7 

double  of  what  is  usually  the  produce  of  one  day's  or  one  hour's 
labour."  ^ 

That  this  is  really  the  foundation  of  the  exchangeable  value 
of  all  things,  excepting  those  which  cannot  be  increased  by 
human  industry,  is  a  doctrine  of  the  utmost  importance  in 
political  economy;  for  from  no  source  do  so  many  errors,  and 
so  much  difference  of  opinion  in  that  science  proceed,  as  from 
the  vague  ideas  which  are  attached  to  the  word  value. 

If  the  quantity  of  labour  realised  in  commodities  regulate 
their  exchangeable  value,  every  increase  of  the  quantity  of 
labour  must  augment  the  value  of  that  commodity  on  which  it 
is  exercised,  as  every  diminution  must  lower  it. 

Adam  Smith,  who  so  accurately  defined  the  original  source  of 
exchangeable  value,  and  who  was  bound  in  consistency  to  main- 
tain that  all  things  became  more  or  less  valuable  in  proportion 
as  more  or  less  labour  was  bestowed  on  their  production,  has 
himself  erected  another  standard  measure  of  value,  and  speaks 
of  things  being  more  or  less  valuable  in  proportion  as  they  will 
exchange  for  more  or  less  of  this  standard  measure.  Sometimes 
he  speaks  of  corn,  at  other  times  of  labour,  as  a  standard  measure ; 
not  the  quantity  of  labour  bestowed  on  the  production  of  any 
object,  but  the  quantity  which  it  can  command  in  the  market: 
as  if  these  were  two  equivalent  expressions,  and  as  if,  because 
a  man's  labour  had  become  doubly  efficient,  and  he  could  there- 
fore produce  twice  the  quantity  of  a  commodity,  he  would 
necessarily  receive  twice  the  former  quantity  in  exchange  for  it. 

If  this  indeed  were  true,  if  the  reward  of  the  labourer  were 
always  in  proportion  to  what  he  produced,  the  quantity  of  labour 
bestowed  on  a  commodity,  and  the  quantity  of  labour  which 
that  commodity  would  purchase,  would  be  equal,  and  either 
might  accurately  measure  the  variations  of  other  things;  but 
they  are  not  equal;  the  first  is  under  many  circumstances  an 
invariable  standard,  indicating  correctly  the  variations  of  other 
things;  the  latter  is  subject  to  as  many  fluctuations  as  the 
commodities  compared  with  it.  Adam  Smith,  after  most  ably 
showing  the  insufficiency  of  a  variable  medium,  such  as  gold 
and  silver,  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  varying  value  of 
other  things,  has  himself,  by  fixing  on  corn  or  labour,  chosen 
a  medium  no  less  variable. 

Gold  and  silver  are  no  doubt  subject  to  fluctuations  fr^j 
discovery  of  new  and  more  abundant  mines;    but 
coveries  are  rare,  and  their  effects,  though  powerful, 

'Book,,  chap.  5.  '     '  '^HVilg,- 


8  Political  Economy 


to  periods  of  comparatively  short  duration.  They  are  subject 
also  to  fluctuation  from  improvements  in  the  skill  and  machinery 
with  which  the  mines  may  be  worked ;  as  in  consequence  of  such 
improvements  a  greater  quantity  may  be  obtained  with  the 
same  labour.  They  are  further  subject  to  fluctuation  from  the 
decreasing  produce  of  the  mines,  after  they  have  yielded  a 
supply  to  the  world  for  a  succession  of  ages.  But  from  which 
of  these  sources  of  fluctuation  is  com  exempted  ?  Does  not  that 
also  vary,  on  one  hand,  from  improvements  in  agriculture,  from 
improved  machinery  and  implements  used  in  husbandry,  as  well 
as  from  the  discovery  of  new  tracts  of  fertile  land,  which  in  other 
countries  may  be  taken  into  cultivation,  and  which  will  affect 
the  value  of  com  in  every  market  where  importation  is  free? 
Is  it  hot  on  the  other  hand  subject  to  be  enhanced  in  value  from 
prohibitions  of  importation,  from  increasing  population  and 
wealth,  and  the  greater  difiiculty  of  obtaining  the  increased 
supplies,  on  account  of  the  additional  quantity  of  labour  which 
the  cultivation  of  inferior  land  requires.^  Is  not  the  value  of 
labour  equally  variable;  being  not  only  affected,  as  all  other 
things  are,  by  the  proportion  between  the  supply  and  demand^ 
which  uniformly  varies  with  every  change  in  the  condition  of 
the  community,  but  also  by  the  varying  price  of  food  and  other 
v..  necessaries,  on  which  the  wages  of  labour  are  expended  ? 

In  the  same  country  double  the  quantity  of  labour  may  be 
required  to  produce  a  given  quantity  of  food  and  necessaries  at 
one  time  that  may  be  necessary  at  another  and  a  distant  time; 
yet  the  labourer's  reward  may  possibly  be  very  little  diminished. 
If  the  labourer's  wages  at  the  former  period  were  a  certain 
quantity  of  food  and  necessaries,  he  probably  could  not  have 
subsisted  if  that  quantity  had  been  reduced.  Food  and  neces- 
saries in  this  case  will  have  risen  loo  per  cent,  if  estimated  by 
the  quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  their  production,  while  they 
will  scarcely  have  increased  in  value  if  measured  by  the  quantity 
of  labour  for  which  they  will  exchange. 

The  same  remark  may  be  made  respecting  two  or  more 
countries.  In  America  and  Poland,  on  the  land  last  taken  into 
cultivation,  a  year's  labour  of  any  given  number  of  men  will 
produce  much  more  corn  than  on  land  similarly  circumstanced 
in  England.  Now,  supposing  all  other  necessaries  to  be  equally 
cheap  in  those  three  countries,  would  it  not  be  a  great  mistake 
to  conclude  that  the  quantity  of  corn  awarded  to  the  labourer 
would  in  each  country  be  in  proportion  to  the  facility  of  pro- 
duction? 


On  Value  9 

If  the  shoes  and  clothing  of  the  labourer  could,  by  improve- 
ments in  machinery,  be  produced  by  one-fourth  of  the  labour 
now  necessary  to  their  production,  they  would  probably  fall 
75  per  cent.;  but  so  far  is  it  from  being  true  that  the  labourer 
would  thereby  be  enabled  permanently  to  consume  four  coats, 
or  four  pair  of  shoes,  instead  of  one,  that  it  is  probable  his  wages 
would  in  no  long  time  be  adjusted  by  the  effects  of  competition, 
and  the  stimulus  to  population,  to  the  new  value  of  the  neces- 
saries on  which  they  were  expended.  If  these  improvements 
extended  to  all  the  objects  of  the  labourer's  consumption,  we 
should  find  him  probably,  at  the  end  of  a  very  few  years,  in 
possession  of  only  a  small,  if  any,  addition  to  his  enjoyments, 
although  the  exchangeable  value  of  those  commodities,  com- 
pared with  any  other  commodity,  in  the  manufacture  of  which 
no  such  improvement  were  made,  had  sustained  a  very  con- 
siderable reduction;  and  though  they  were  the  produce  of  a 
very  considerably  diminished  quantity  of  labour. 

It  cannot  then  be  correct  to  say  with  Adam  Smith,  "  that"^ 
as  labour  may  sometimes  purchase  a  greater  and  sometimes  a 
smaller  quantity  of  goods,  it  is  their  value  which  varies,  not 
that  of  the  labour  which  purchases  them;  "  and  therefore^ 
"  that  labour,  alone  never  varying  in  its  own  value,  is  alone  the 
ultimate  and  real  standard  by  which  the  value  of  all  commo- 
dities can  at  all  times  and  places  be  estimated  and  compared ;  " 
— but  it  is  correct  to  say,  as  Adam  Smith  had  previously  said, 
"  that  the  proportion  between  the  quantities  of  labour  necessary 
for  acquiring  different  objects  seems  to  be  the  only  circumstance 
which  can  afford  any  rule  for  exchanging  them  for  one  another;  " 
or  in  other  words  that  it  is  the  comparative  quantity  of  com- 
modities which  labour  will  produce  that  determines  their 
present  or  past  relative  value,  and  not  the  comparative  quan- 
tities of  commodities  which  are  given  to  the  labourer  in  exchange 
for  his  labour. 

Two  commodities  vary  in  relative  value,  and  we  wish  to  know 
in  which  the  variation  has  really  taken  place.  If  we  compare 
the  present  value  of  one  with  shoes,  stockings,  hats,  iron,  sugar, 
and  all  other  commodities,  we  find  that  it  will  exchange  for 
precisely  the  same  quantity  of  all  these  things  as  before.  If 
we  compare  the  other  with  the  same  commodities,  we  find  it 
has  varied  with  respect  to  them  all:  we  may  then  with  great 
probability  infer  that  the  variation  has  been  in  this  commodity, 
and  not  in  the  commodities  with  which  we  have  compared  it. 
If  on  examining  still  more  particularly  into  all  the  circumstances 


1 

ties,  ■ 
)ital  ■ 

ate      "I 


lo  Political  Economy 

connected  with  the  production  of  these  various  commodities 
we  find  that  precisely  the  same  quantity  of  labour  and  capital 
are  necessary  to  the  production  of  the  shoes,  stockings,  hats, 
iron,  sugar,  etc.;  but  that  the  same  quantity  as  before  is  not 
necessary  to  produce  the  single  commodity  whose  relative  value 
is  altered,  probability  is  changed  into  certainty,  and  we  are 
sure  that  the  variation  is  in  the  single  commodity:  we  then 
discover  also  the  cause  of  its  variation. 

If  I  found  that  an  ounce  of  gold  would  exchange  for  a  less 
quantity  of  all  the  commodities  above  enumerated  and  many 
others;  and  if,  moreover,  I  found  that  by  the  discovery  of  a 
new  and  more  fertile  mine,  or  by  the  employment  of  machinery 
to  great  advantage,  a  given  quantity  of  gold  could  be  obtained 
with  a  less  quantity  of  labour,  I  should  be  justified  in  saying 
that  the  cause  of  the  alteration  in  the  value  of  gold  relatively 
to  other  commodities  was  the  greater  facility  of  its  production, 
or  the  smaller  quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  obtain  it.  In 
like  manner,  if  labour  fell  very  considerably  in  value,  relatively 
to  all  other  things,  and  if  I  found  that  its  fall  was  in  consequence 
of  an  abundant  supply,  encouraged  by  the  great  facility  with 
which  com,  and  the  other  necessaries  of  the  labourer,  were 
produced,  it  would,  I  apprehend,  be  correct  for  me  to  say  that 
com  and  necessaries  had  fallen  in  value  in  consequence  of  less 
quantity  of  labour  being  necessary  to  produce  them,  and  that 
this  facility  of  providing  for  the  support  of  the  labourer  had 
been  followed  by  a  fall  in  the  value  of  labour.  No,  say  Adam 
Smith  and  Mr.  Malthus,  in  the  case  of  the  gold  you  were  correct 
in  calling  its  variation  a  fall  of  its  value,  because  corn  and  labour 
had  not  then  varied;  and  as  gold  would  command  a  less  quan- 
tity of  them,  as  well  as  of  all  other  things,  than  before,  it  was 
correct  to  say  that  all  things  had  remained  stationary  and  that 
gold  only  had  varied;  but  when  com  and  labour  fall,  things 
which  we  have  selected  to  be  our  standard  measure  of  value, 
notwithstanding  all  the  variations  to  which  we  acknowledge 
they  are  subject,  it  would  be  highly  improper  to  say  so;  the 
correct  language  will  be  to  say  that  corn  and  labour  have 
remained  stationary,  and  all  other  things  have  risen  in  value. 

Now  it  is  against  this  language  that  I  protest.  I  find  that 
precisely,  as  in  the  case  of  the  gold,  the  cause  of  the  variation 
between  corn  and  other  things  is  the  smaller  quantity  of  labour 
necessary  to  produce  it,  and  therefore,  by  all  just  reasoning,  I 
am  bound  to  call  the  variation  of  corn  and  labour  a  fall  in  their 
value,  and  not  a  rise  in  the  value  of  the  things  with  which  they 


I 


On  Value  1 1 

are  compared.  If  I  have  to  hire  a  labourer  for  a  week^  and 
instead  of  ten  shillings  I  pay  him  eight,  no  variation  having 
taken  place  in  the  value  of  money,  the  labourer  can  probably 
obtain  more  food  and  necessaries  with  his  eight  shillings  than 
he  before  obtained  for  ten:  but  this  is  owing,  not  to  a  rise  in 
the  real  value  of  his  wages,  as  stated  by  Adam  Smith,  and 
more  recently  by  Mr.  Malthus,  but  to  a  fall  in  the  value  of  the 
things  on  which  his  wages  are  expended,  things  perfectly  dis- 
tinct; and  yet  for  calling  this  a  fall  in  the  real  value  of  wages,  I 
am  told  that  I  adopt  new  and  unusual  language,  not  recon- 
cilable with  the  true  principles  of  the  science.  To  me  it 
appears  that  the  unusual  and,  indeed,  inconsistent  language 
is  that  used  by  my  opponents. 

Suppose  a  labourer  to  be  paid  a  bushel  of  com  for  a  week's 
work  when  the  price  of  corn  is  Sos.  per  quarter,  and  that  he  is 
paid  a  bushel  and  a  quarter  when  the  price  falls  to  405.  Sup- 
pose, too,  that  he  consumes  half  a  bushel  of  com  a  week  in  his 
own  family,  and  exchanges  the  remainder  for  other  things,  such 
as  fuel,  soap,  candles,  tea,  sugar,  salt,  etc.  etc.;  if  the  three- 
fourths  of  a  bushel  which  will  remain  to  him,  in  one  case,  cannot 
procure  him  as  much  of  the  above  commodities  as  half  a  bushel 
did  in  the  other,  which  it  will  not,  will  labour  have  risen  or 
fallen  in  value?  Risen,  Adam  Smith  must  say,  because  his 
standard  is  corn,  and  the  labourer  receives  more  com  for  a 
week's  labour.  Fallen,  must  the  same  Adant  Smith  say, 
*'  because  the  value  of  a  thing  depends  on  the  power  of  pur- 
chasing other  goods  which  the  possession  of  that  object  con- 
veys," and  labour  has  a  less  power  of  purchasing  such  other 
goods. 

SECTION  II 

Labour  of   different   qualities  differently  rewarded.     This  no  cause   of 
variation  in  the  relative  value  of  commodities 

In  speaking,  however,  of  labour,  as  being  the  foundation  of  all 
value,  and  the  relative  quantity  of  labour  as  almost  exclusively 
determining  the  relative  value  of  commodities,  I  must  not  be 
supposed  to  be  inattentive  to  the  different  qualities  of  labour, 
and  the  difficulty  of  comparing  an  hour's  or  a  day's  labour  in 
one  employment  with  the  same  duration  of  labour  in  another. 
The  estimation  in  which  different  qualities  of  labour  are  held 
comes  soon  to  be  adjusted  in  the  market  with  sufficient  pre- 
cision for  all  practical  purposes,  and  depends  much  on  the 
comparative  skill  of  the  labourer  and  intensity  of  the  labour 


12  Political  Economy 

perfonTied.    The  scale,  when  once  formed,  is  liable  to  littl 
variation.     If  a  day's  labour  of  a  working  jeweller  be  more 
valuable  than  a  day's  labour  of  a  common  labourer,  it  has  long 
ago  been  adjusted  and  placed  in  its  proper  position  in  the  scale 
of  value. ^ 

In  comparing,  therefore,  the  value  of  the  same  commodity 
at  different  periods  of  time,  the  consideration  of  the  comparative 
skill  and  intensity  of  labour  required  for  that  particular  com- 
modity needs  scarcely  to  be  attended  to,  as  it  operates  equally 
at  both  periods.  One  description  of  labour  at  one  time  is 
compared  with  the  same  description  of  labour  at  another;  if 
a  tenth,  a  fifth,  or  a  fourth  has  been  added  or  taken  away,  an 
effect  proportioned  to  the  cause  will  be  produced  on  the  relative 
f      value  of  the  commodity. 

^^  \y'  If  a  piece  of  cloth  be  now  of  the  value  of  two  pieces  of  linen, 

>  J»  and  if,  in  ten  years  hence,  the  ordinary  value  of  a  piece  of  cloth 

r      should  be  four  pieces  of  linen,  we  may  safely  conclude  that 

either  more  labour  is  required  to  make  the  cloth,  or  less  to  make 

the  linen,  or  that  both  causes  have  operated. 

As  the  inquiry  to  which  I  wish  to  draw  the  reader's  attention 
relates  to  the  effect  of  the  variations  in  the  relative  value  of 
commodities,  and  not  in  their  absolute  value,  it  will  be  of  little 
importance  to  examine  into  the  comparative  degree  of  estima- 
tion in  which  the  different  kinds  of  human  labour  are  held.  We 
may  fairly  conclude  that  whatever  inequality  there  might 
originally  have  been  in  them,  whatever  the  ingenuity,  skill,  or 
time  necessary  for  the  acquirement  of  one  species  of  manual 
dexterity  more  than  another,  it  continues  nearly  the  same  from 
one  generation  to  another;  or  at  least  that  the  variation  is 
very   inconsiderable    from    year   to   year,   and   therefore   can 

^  "  But  though  labour  be  the  real  measure  of  the  exchangeable  value  oi 
all  commodities,  it  is  not  that  by  which  their  value  is  commonly  estimated. 
It  is  often  difficult  to  ascertain  the  proportion  between  two  different 
quantities  of  labour.  The  time  spent  in  two  different  sorts  of  work  will 
not  always  alone  determine  this  proportion.  The  different  degrees  of 
hardship  endured,  and  of  ingenuity  exercised,  must  likewise  be  taken  into 
account.  There  may  be  more  labour  in  an  hour's  hard  work  than  in  two 
hours'  easy  business;  or  in  an  hour's  application  to  a  trade,  which  it  costs 
ten  years'  labour  to  learn,  than  in  a  month's  industry  at  an  ordinary  and 
obvious  employment.  But  it  is  not  easy  to  find  any  accurate  measure, 
either  of  hardship  or  ingenuity.  In  exchanging,  indeed,  the  different 
productions  of  different  sorts  of  labour  for  one  another,  some  allowance 
is  commonly  made  for  both.  It  is  adjusted,  however,  not  by  any  accurate 
measure,  but  by  the  higgling  and  bargaining  of  the  market,  according  to 
that  sort  of  rough  equality  which,  though  not  exact,  is  sufficient  for 
carrying  on  the  buT-iness  of  common  life." — Wealth  of  Nations,  book  i. 
chap.  10. 


On  Value  1 3 

have  little  effect,  for  short  periods,  on  the  relative  value  of 
commodities. 

"  The  proportion  between  the  different  rates  both  of  wages 
and  profit  in  the  different  employments  of  labour  and  stock 
seems  not  to  be  much  affected,  as  has  already  been  observed, 
by  the  riches  or  poverty,  the  advancing,  stationary,  or  declining 
state  of  the  society.  Such  revolutions  in  the  public  welfare, 
though  they  affect  the  general  rates  both  of  wages  and  profit, 
must  in  the  end  affect  them  equally  in  all  different  employments. 
The  proportion  between  them  therefore  must  remain  the  same, 
and  cannot  well  be  altered,  at  least  for  any  considerable  time, 
by  any  such  revolutions."  ^ 


SECTION  III 

Not  only  the  labour  applied  immediately  to  commodities  affect  their  value, 
but  the  labour  also  which  is  bestowed  on  the  implements,  tools,  and 
buildings,  with  which  such  labour  is  assisted 

Even  in  that  early  state  to  which  Adam  Smith  refers,  some 
capital,  though  possibly  made  and  accumulated  by  the  hunter 
himself,  would  be  necessar}^  to  enable  him  to  kill  his  game. 
Without  some  weapon,  neither  the  beaver  nor  the  deer  could 
be  destroyed,  and  therefore  the  value  of  these  animals  would 
be  regulated,  not  solely  by  the  time  and  labour  necessary  to 
their  destruction,  but  also  by  the  time  and  labour  necessary  for 
providing  the  hunter's  capital,  the  weapon,  by  the  aid  of  which 
their  destruction  was  effected. 

Suppose  the  weapon  necessary  to  kill  the  beaver  was  con- 
structed with  much  more  labour  than  that  necessary  to  kill  the 
deer,  on  account  of  the  greater  difficulty  of  approaching  near 
to  the  former  animal,  and  the  consequent  necessity  of  its  being 
more  true  to  its  mark;  one  beaver  would  naturally  be  of  more 
value  than  two  deer,  and  precisely  for  this  reason,  that  more 
labour  would,  on  the  whole,  be  necessary  to  its  destruction. 
Or  suppose  that  the  same  quantity  of  labour  was  necessary  to 
make  both  weapons,  but  that  they  were  of  very  unequal  dura- 
bility; of  the  durable  implement  only  a  small  portion  of  its 
value  would  be  transferred  to  the  commodity,  a  much  greater 
portion  of  the  value  of  the  less  durable  implement  would  be 
realised  in  the  commodity  which  it  contributed  to  produce. 

All  the  implements  necessary  to  kill  the  beaver  and  deer 
might  belong  to  one  class  of  men,  and  the  labour  employed  in 
^  WcaUh  of  Nations,  book  i.  chap.  lo. 


Political  Economy 


their  destruction  might  be  furnished  by  another  class; 
their  comparative  prices  would  be  in  proportion  to  the  actual 
labour  bestowed^  both  on  the  formation  of  the  capital  and  on 
the  destruction  of  the  animals.  Under  different  circumstances 
of  plenty  or  scarcity  of  capital,  as  compared  with  labour,  under 
different  circumstances  of  plenty  or  scarcity  of  the  food  and 
necessaries  essential  to  the  support  of  men,  those  who  furnished 
an  equal  value  of  capital  for  either  one  employment  or  for  the 
other  might  have  a  half,  a  fourth,  or  an  eighth  of  the  produce 
obtained,  the  remainder  being  paid  as  wages  to  those  who 
furnished  the  labour;  yet  this  division  could  not  affect  the 
relative  value  of  these  commodities,  since  whether  the  profits 
of  capital  were  greater  or  less,  whether  they  were  50,  20,  or 
10  per  cent.,  or  whether  the  wages  of  labour  were  high  or  low, 
they  would  operate  equally  on  both  employments. 

If  we  suppose  the  occupations  of  the  society  extended,  that 
some  provide  canoes  and  tackle  necessary  for  fishing,  others 
the  seed  and  rude  machinery  first  used  in  agriculture,  still  the 
same  principle  would  hold  true,  that  the  exchangeable  value  of 
the  commodities  produced  would  be  in  proportion  to  the  labour 
bestowed  on  their  production ;  not  on  their  immediate  produc- 
tion only,  but  on  all  those  implements  or  machines  required  to 
give  effect  to  the  particular  labour  to  which  they  were  applied. 

If  we  look  to  a  state  of  society  in  which  greater  improvements 
have  been  made,  and  in  which  arts  and  commerce  flourish,  we 
shall  still  find  that  commodities  vary  in  value  conformably 
with  this  principle:  in  estimating  the  exchangeable  value  of 
stockings,  for  example,  we  shall  find  that  their  value,  com- 
paratively with  other  things,  depends  on  the  total  quantity  of 
labour  necessary  to  manufacture  them  and  bring  them  to 
market.  First,  there  is  the  labour  necessary  to  cultivate  the 
land  on  which  the  raw  cotton  is  grown;  secondly,  the  labour 
of  conveying  the  cotton  to  the  country  where  the  stockings  are 
to  be  manufactured,  which  includes  a  portion  of  the  labour 
bestowed  in  building  the  ship  in  which  it  is  conveyed,  and 
which  is  charged  in  the  freight  of  the  goods ;  thirdly,  the  labour 
of  the  spinner  and  weaver;  fourthly,  a  portion  of  the  labour 
of  the  engineer,  smith,  and  carpenter,  who  erected  the  buildings 
and  machinery,  by  the  help  of  which  they  are  made;  fifthly, 
the  labour  of  the  retail  dealer,  and  of  many  others,  whom  it  is 
unnecessary  further  to  particularise.  The  aggregate  sum  of 
these  various  kinds  of  labour  determines  the  quantity  of  other 
things  for  which  these  stockings  will  exchange,  while  the  same 


On  Value  15 

consideration  of  the  various  quantities  of  labour  which  have 
been  bestowed  on  those  other  things  will  equally  govern  the 
portion  of  them  which  will  be  given  for  the  stockings. 

To  convince  ourselves  that  this  is  the  real  foundation  of 
exchangeable  value,  let  us  suppose  any  improvement  to  be 
made  in  the  means  of  abridging  labour  in  any  one  of  the  various 
processes  through  which  the  raw  cotton  must  pass  before  the 
manufactured  stockings  come  to  the  market  to  be  exchanged 
for  other  things,  and  observe  the  effects  which  will  follow.  If 
fewer  men  were  required  to  cultivate  the  raw  cotton,  or  if  fewer 
sailors  were  employed  in  navigating,  or  shipwrights  in  construct- 
ing the  ship,  in  which  it  was  conveyed  to  us;  if  fewer  hands 
were  employed  in  raising  the  buildings  and  machinery,  or  if 
these,  when  raised,  were  rendered  more  efficient,  the  stockings 
would  inevitably  fall  in  value,  and  consequently  command  less 
of  other  things.  They  would  fall,  because  a  less  quantity  of 
labour  was  necessary  to  their  production,  and  would  therefore 
exchange  for  a  smaller  quantity  of  those  things  in  which  no  such 
abridgment  of  labour  had  been  made. 

Economy  in  the  use  of  labour  never  fails  to  reduce  the  relative 
value  of  a  commodity,  whether  the  saving  be  in  the  labour 
necessary  to  the  manufacture  of  the  commodity  itself,  or  in 
that  necessary  to  the  formation  of  the  capital  by  the  aid  of 
which  it  is  produced.  In  either  case  the  price  of  stockings 
would  fall,  whether  there  were  fewer  men  employed  as  bleachers, 
spinners,  and  weavers,  persons  immediately  necessary  to  their 
manufacture;  or  as  sailors,  carriers,  engineers,  and  smiths, 
persons  more  indirectly  concerned.  In  the  one  case,  the  whole 
saving  of  labour  would  fall  on  the  stockings,  because  that 
portion  of  labour  was  wholly  confined  to  the  stockings;  in  the 
other,  a  portion  only  would  fall  on  the  stockings,  the  remainder 
being  applied  to  all  those  other  commodities,  to  the  production 
of  which  the  buildings,  machinery,  and  carriage  were  subservient. 

Suppose  that,  in  the  early  stages  of  society,  the  bows  and 
arrows  of  the  hunter  were  of  equal  value,  and  of  equal  dura- 
bility, with  the  canoe  and  implements  of  the  fisherman,  both 
being  the  produce  of  the  same  quantity  of  labour.  Under  such 
circumstances  the  value  of  the  deer,  the  produce  of  the  hunter's 
day's  labour,  would  be  exactly  equal  to  the  value  of  the  fish,  the 
produce  of  the  fisherman's  day's  labour.  The  comparative 
value  of  the  fish  and  the  game  would  be  entirely  regulated  by 
the  quantity  of  labour  realised  in  each,  whatever  might  be  the 
quantity  of  production  or  however  high  or  low  general  wages 


1 6  Political  Economy 

or  profits  might  be.  If,  for  example,  the  canoes  and  implements 
of  the  fisherman  were  of  the  value  of  £ioo,  and  were  calculated 
to  last  for  ten  years,  and  he  employed  ten  men,  whose  annual 
labour  cost  £ioo,  and  who  in  one  day  obtained  by  their  labour 
twenty  salmon:  If  the  weapons  employed  by  the  hunter  were 
also  of  £ioo  value,  and  calculated  to  last  ten  years,  and  if  he 
also  employed  ten  men,  whose  annual  labour  cost  £ioo,  and 
who  in  one  day  procured  him  ten  deer;  then  the  natural  price 
of  a  deer  would  be  two  salmon,  whether  the  proportion  of  the 
whole  produce  bestowed  on  the  men  who  obtained  it  were 
large  or  small.  The  proportion  which  might  be  paid  for  wages 
is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  the  question  of  profits;  for  it 
must  at  once  be  seen  that  profits  would  be  high  or  low  exactly 
in  proportion  as  wages  were  low  or  high ;  but  it  could  not  in  the 
least  affect  the  relative  value  of  fish  and  game,  as  wages  would 
be  high  or  low  at  the  same  time  in  both  occupations.  If  the 
hunter  urged  the  plea  of  his  paying  a  large  proportion,  or  the 
value  of  a  large  proportion  of  his  game  for  wages,  as  an  induce- 
ment to  the  fisherman  to  give  him  more  fish  in  exchange  for  his 
game,  the  latter  would  state  that  he  was  equally  affected  by  the 
same  cause;  and  therefore,  under  all  variations  of  wages  and 
profits,  under  all  the  effects  of  accumulation  of  capital,  as  long 
as  they  continued  by  a  day's  labour  to  obtain  respectively  the 
same  quantity  of  fish  and  the  same  quantity  of  game,  the 
natural  rate  of  exchange  would  be  one  deer  for  two  salmon. 

If  with  the  same  quantity  of  labour  a  less  quantity  of  fish  or 
a  greater  quantity  of  game  were  obtained,  the  value  of  fish 
would  rise  in  comparison  with  that  of  game.  If,  on  the  contrary, 
with  the  same  quantity  of  labour  a  less  quantity  of  game  or  a 
greater  quantity  of  fish  was  obtained,  game  would  rise  in 
comparison  with  fish.      V 

If  there  were  any  other  commodity  which  was  invariable  in  its 
value,  we  should  be  able  to  ascertain,  by  comparing  the  value  of 
fish  and  game  with  this  commodity,  how  much  of  the  variation 
was  to  be  attributed  to  a  cause  which  affected  the  value  of  fish, 
and  how  much  to  a  cause  which  affected  the  value  of  game. 

Suppose  money  to  be  that  commodity.  If  a  salmon  were 
worth  £i  and  a  deer  £2,  one  deer  would  be  worth  two  salmon. 
But  a  deer  might  become  of  the  value  of  three  salmon,  for  more 
labour  might  be  required  to  obtain  the  deer,  or  less  to  get  the 
salmon,  or  both  these  causes  might  operate  at  the  same  time. 
If  we  had  this  invariable  standard,  we  might  easily  ascertain 
in  what  degree  either  of  these  causes  operated.    If  saknon 


On  Value  17 

continued  to  sell  for  £1  whilst  deer  rose  to  £3,  we  might  conclude 
that  more  labour  was  required  to  obtain  the  deer.  If  deer 
continued  at  the  same  price  of  £2  and  salmon  sold  for  135.  4^., 
we  might  then  be  sure  that  less  labour  was  required  to  obtain 
the  salmon;  and  if  deer  rose  to  £2  los.  and  salmon  fell  to  165.  8^., 
we  should  be  convinced  that  both  causes  had  operated  in 
producing  the  alteration  of  the  relative  value  of  these  com- 
modities. 

No  alteration  in  the  wages  of  labour  could  produce  any 
alteration  in  the  relative  value  of  these  commodities ;  for  suppose 
them  to  rise,  no  greater  quantity  of  labour  would  be  required 
in  any  of  these  occupations  but  it  would  be  paid  for  at  a  higher 
price,  and  the  same  reasons  which  should  make  the  hunter  and 
fisherman  endeavour  to  raise  the  value  of  their  game  and  fish 
would  cause  the  owner  of  the  mine  to  raise  the  value  of  his  gold. 
This  inducement  acting  with  the  same  force  on  all  these  three 
occupations,  and  the  relative  situation  of  those  engaged  in  them 
being  the  same  before  and  after  the  rise  of  wages,  the  relative 
value  of  game,  fish,  and  gold  would  continue  unaltered.  Wages 
might  rise  twenty  per  cent.,  and  profits  consequently  fall  in  a 
greater  or  less  proportion,  without  occasioning  the  least  altera- 
tion in  the  relative  value  of  these  commodities. 

Now  suppose  that,  with  the  same  labour  and  fixed  capital, 
more  fish  could  be  produced,  but  no  more  gold  or  game,  the 
relative  value  of  fish  would  fall  in  comparison  with  gold  or  game. 
If,  instead  of  twenty  salmon,  twenty-five  were  the  produce  of 
one  day's  labour,  the  price  of  a  salmon  would  be  sixteen  shillings 
instead  of  a  pound,  and  two  salmon  and  a  half,  instead  of  two 
salmon,  would  be  given  in  exchange  for  one  deer,  but  the  price 
of  deer  would  continue  at  £2  as  before.  In  the  same  manner, 
if  fewer  fish  could  be  obtained  with  the  same  capital  and  labour, 
fish  would  rise  in  comparative  value.  Fish  then  would  rise  or  fall 
in  exchangeable  value,  only  because  more  or  less  labour  was 
required  to  obtain  a  given  quantity;  and  it  never  could  rise 
or  fall  beyond  the  proportion  of  the  increased  or  diminished 
quantity  of  labour  required. 

If  we  had  then  an  invariable  standard,  by  which  we  could 
measure  the  variation  in  other  commodities,  we  should  find 
that  the  utmost  limit  to  which  they  could  permanently  rise,  if 
produced  under  the  circumstances  supposed,  was  proportioned 
to  the  additional  quantity  of  labour  required  for  their  pro- 
duction; and  that  unless  more  labour  were  required  for  their 
production  they  could  not  rise  in  any  degree  whatever.    A  rise 

B 


1 8  Political  Economy 

of  wages  would  not  raise  them  in  money  value,  nor  relatively 
to  any  other  commodities,  the  production  of  which  required 
no  additional  quantity  of  labour,  which  employed  the  same 
proportion  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital,  and  fixed  capital 
of  the  same  durability.  If  more  or  less  labour  were  required 
in  the  production  of  the  other  commodity,  we  have  already 
stated  that  this  will  immediately  occasion  an  alteration  in  its 
relative  value,  but  such  alteration  is  owing  to  the  altered 
quantity  of  requisite  labour,  and  not  to  the  rise  of  wages. 


SECTION  IV 

The  principle  that  the  quantity  of  labour  bestowed  on  the  production  of 
commodities  regulates  their  relative  value  considerably  modified  by 
the  employment  of  machinery  and  other  fixed  and  durable  capital 

In  the  former  section  we  have  supposed  the  implements  and 
weapons  necessary  to  kill  the  deer  and  salmon  to  be  equally 
durable,  and  to  be  the  result  of  the  same  quantity  of  labour,  and 
we  have  seen  that  the  variations  in  the  relative  value  of  deer 
and  salmon  depended  solely  on  the  varying  quantities  of  labour 
necessary  to  obtain  them,  but  in  every  state  of  society,  the 
tools,  implements,  buildings,  and  machinery  employed  in 
different  trades  may  be  of  various  degrees  of  durability,  and 
may  require  different  portions  of  labour  to  produce  them. 
The  proportions,  too,  in  which  the  capital  that  is  to  support 
labour,  and  the  capital  that  is  invested  in  tools,  machinery, 
and  buildings,  may  be  variously  combined.  This  difference 
in  the  degree  of  durability  of  fixed  capital,  and  this  variety  in 
the  proportions  in  which  the  two  sorts  of  capital  may  be  com- 
bined, introduce  another  cause,  besides  the  greater  or  less 
quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  produce  commodities,  for  the 
variations  in  their  relative  value — this  cause  is  the  rise  or  fall 
in  the  value  of  labour. 

The  food  and  clothing  consumed  by  the  labourer,  the  buildings 
in  which  he  works,  the  implements  with  which  his  labour  is 
assisted,  are  all  of  a  perishable  nature.  There  is,  however, 
a  vast  difference  in  the  time  for  which  these  different  capitals 
will  endure :  a  steam-engine  will  last  longer  than  a  ship,  a  ship 
than  the  clothing  of  the  labourer,  and  the  clothing  of  the 
labourer  longer  than  the  food  which  he  consumes. 

According  as  capital  is  rapidly  perishable,  and  requires  to  be 
frequently  reproduced,  or  is  of  slow  consumption,  it  is  classed 


On  Value  19 

under  the  heads  of  circulating  or  of  fixed  capital.^  A  brewer 
whose  buildings  and  machinery  are  valuable  and  durable  is 
said  to  employ  a  large  portion  of  fixed  capital :  on  the  contrary, 
a  shoemaker,  whose  capital  is  chiefly  employed  in  the  payment 
of  wages,  which  are  expended  on  food  and  clothing,  commodities 
more  perishable  than  buildings  and  machinery,  is  said  to  employ 
a  large  proportion  of  his  capital  as  circulating  capital. 

It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  the  circulating  capital  may 
circulate,  or  be  returned  to  its  employer,  in  very  unequal  times. 
The  wheat  bought  by  a  farmer  to  sow  is  comparatively  a  fixed 
capital  to  the  wheat  purchased  by  a  baker  to  make  into  loaves. 
One  leaves  it  in  the  ground  and  can  obtain  no  return  for  a  year; 
the  other  can  get  it  ground  into  flour,  sell  it  as  bread  to  his 
customers,  and  have  his  capital  free  to  renew  the  same  or 
commence  any  other  employment  in  a  week. 

Two  trades  then  may  employ  the  same  amount  of  capital; 
but  it  may  be  very  differently  divided  with  respect  to  the 
portion  which  is  fixed  and  that  which  is  circulating. 

In  one  trade  very  little  capital  may  be  employed  as  circulating 
capital,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  support  of  labour — it  may  be 
principally  invested  in  machinery,  implements,  buildings,  etc., 
capital  of  a  comparatively  fixed  and  durable  character.  In 
another  trade  the  same  amount  of  capital  may  be  used,  but 
it  may  be  chiefly  employed  in  the  support  of  labour,  and  very 
little  may  be  invested  in  implements,  machines,  and  buildings. 
A  rise  in  the  wages  of  labour  cannot  fail  to  affect  unequally 
commodities  produced  under  such  different  circumstances. 

Again,  two  manufacturers  may  employ  the  same  amount 
of  fixed  and  the  same  amount  of  circulating  capital;  but  the 
durability  of  their  fixed  capitals  may  be  very  unequal.  One 
may  have  steam-engines  of  the  value  of  £10,000,  the  other, 
ships  of  the  same  value. 

If  men  employed  no  machinery  in  production  but  labour  only, 
and  were  all  the  same  length  of  time  before  they  brought  their 
commodities  to  market,  the  exchangeable  value  of  their  goods 
would  be  precisely  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  labour 
employed. 

If  they  employed  fixed  capital  of  the  same  value  and  of  the 
same  durability,  then,  too,  the  value  of  the  commodities  pro- 
duced would  be  the  same,  and  they  would  vary  with  the  greater 
or  less  quantity  of  labour  employed  on  their  production. 

^  A  division  not  essential,  and  in  which  the  line  of  demarcation  cannot 
be  accurately  drawn. 


20  Political  Economy 

But  although  commodities  produced  under  similar  circum- 
stances would  not  vary  with  respect  to  each  other  from  any 
cause  but  an  addition  or  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  labour 
necessary  to  produce  one  or  other  of  them,  yet,  compared  with 
others  not  produced  with  the  same  proportionate  quantity  of 
fixed  capital,  they  would  vary  from  the  other  cause  also  which 
I  have  before  mentioned,  namely,  a  rise  in  the  value  of  labour, 
although  neither  more  nor  less  labour  were  employed  in  the  pro- 
duction of  either  of  them.  Barley  and  oats  would  continue  to 
bear  the  same  relation  to  each  other  under  any  variation  of  wages. 
Cotton  goods  and  cloth  would  do  the  same,  if  they  also  were 
produced  under  circumstances  precisely  similar  to  each  other, 
but  yet  with  a  rise  or  fall  of  wages  barley  might  be  more  or  less 
valuable  compared  with  cotton  goods  and  oats  compared  witli 
cloth. 

Suppose  two  men  employ  one  hundred  men  each  for  a  year 
in  the  construction  of  two  machines,  and  another  man  employs 
the  same  number  of  men  in  cultivating  com,  each  of  the 
machines  at  the  end  of  the  year  will  be  of  the  same  value  as  the 
com,  for  they  will  each  be  produced  by  the  same  quantity  of 
labour.  Suppose  one  of  the  owners  of  one  of  the  machines  to 
employ  it,  with  the  assistance  of  one  hundred  men,  the  following 
year  in  making  cloth,  and  the  owner  of  the  other  machine  to 
employ  his  also,  with  the  assistance  likewise  of  one  hundred 
men,  in  making  cotton  goods,  while  the  farmer  continues  to 
employ  one  hundred  men  as  before  in  the  cultivation  of  com. 
During  the  second  year  they  will  all  have  employed  the  same 
quantity  of  labour,  but  the  goods  and  machine  together  of  the 
clothier,  and  also  of  the  cotton  manufacturer,  will  be  the  result 
of  the  labour  of  two  hundred  men  employed  for  a  year;  or, 
rather,  of  the  labour  of  one  hundred  men  for  two  years ;  whereas 
the  corn  will  be  produced  by  the  labour  of  one  hundred  men 
for  one  year,  consequently  if  the  corn  be  of  the  value  of  £500, 
the  machine  and  cloth  of  the  clothier  together  ought  to  be  of 
the  value  of  £1000,  and  the  machine  and  cotton  goods  of  the 
cotton  manufacturer  ought  to  be  also  of  twice  the  value  of  the 
corn.  But  they  will  be  of  more  than  twice  the  value  of  the 
com,  for  the  profit  on  the  clothier's  and  cotton  manufacturer's 
capital  for  the  first  year  has  been  added  to  their  capitals,  while' 
that  of  the  farmer  has  been  expended  and  enjoyed.  On  account 
then  of  the  different  degrees  of  durability  of  their  capitals,  or, 
which  is  the  same  thing,  on  account  of  the  time  which  must 
elapse  before  one  set  of  commodities  can  be  brought  to  market. 


On  Value  2i 

they  will  be  valuable,  not  exactly  in  proportion  to  the  quantity 
of  labour  bestowed  on  them — they  will  not  be  as  two  to  one, 
but  something  more,  to  compensate  for  the  greater  length  of 
time  which  must  elapse  before  the  most  valuable  can  be  brought 
to  market. 

Suppose  that  for  the  labour  of  each  workman  £50  per  annum 
were  paid,  or  that  £5000  capital  were  employed  and  profits  were 
10  per  cent.,  the  value  of  each  of  the  machines  as  well  as  of  the 
com,  at  the  end  of  the  first  year,  would  be  £5500.  The  second 
year  the  manufacturers  and  farmers  will  again  employ  £5000 
each  in  the  support  of  labour,  and  will  therefore  again  sell  their 
goods  for  £5500;  but  the  men  using  the  machines,  to  be  on  a 
par  with  the  farmer,  must  not  only  obtain  £5500  for  the  equal 
capitals  of  £5000  employed  on  labour,  but  they  must  obtain 
a  further  sum  of  £550  for  the  profit  on  £5500,  which  they  have 
invested  in  machinery,  and  consequently  their  goods  must  sell 
for  £6050.  Here,  then,  are  capitalists  employing  precisely  the 
same  quantity  of  labour  annually  on  the  production  of  their 
commodities,  and  yet  the  goods  they  produce  differ  in  value 
on  account  of  the  different  quantities  of  fixed  capital,  or  accumu- 
lated labour,  employed  by  each  respectively.  The  cloth  and 
cotton  goods  are  of  the  same  value,  because  they  are  the  produce 
of  equal  quantities  of  labour  and  equal  quantities  of  fixed  capital; 
but  corn  is  not  of  the  same  value  as  these  commodities,  because 
it  is  produced,  as  far  as  regards  fixed  capital,  under  different 
circumstances. 

But  how  will  their  relative  value  be  affected  by  a  rise  in  the 
value  of  labour?  It  is  evident  that  the  relative  values  of  cloth 
and  cotton  goods  will  undergo  no  change,  for  what  affects  one 
must  equally  affect  the  other  under  the  circumstances  supposed ; 
neither  will  the  relative  values  of  wheat  and  barley  undergo 
any  change,  for  they  are  produced  under  the  same  circum- 
stances as  far  as  fixed  and  circulating  capital  are  concerned; 
but  the  relative  value  of  corn  to  cloth,  or  to  cotton  goods,  must 
be  altered  by  a  rise  of  labour. 

There  can  be  no  rise  in  the  value  of  labour  without  a  fall  of 
profits.  If  the  com  is  to  be  divided  between  the  farmer  and  the 
labourer,  the  larger  the  proportion  that  is  given  to  the  latter  the 
less  will  remain  for  the  former.  So,  if  cloth  or  cotton  goods  be 
divided  between  the  workman  and  his  employer,  the  larger  the 
proportion  given  to  the  former  the  less  remains  for  the  latter. 
Suppose  then,  that  owing  to  a  rise  of  wages,  profits  fall  from 
10  to  9  per  cent.,  instead  of  adding  £550  to  the  common  price 


2  2  Political  Economy 

of  their  goods  (to  £5500)  for  the  profits  on  their  fixed  capital, 
the  manufacturers  would  add  only  9  per  cent,  on  that  sum,  or 
£495,  consequently  the  price  would  be  £5995  instead  of  £6050. 
As  the  corn  would  continue  to  sell  for  £5500  the  manufactured 
goods  in  which  more  fixed  capital  was  employed  would  fall 
relatively  to  corn  or  to  any  other  goods  in  which  a  less  portion 
of  fixed  capital  entered.  The  degree  of  alteration  in  the  relative 
value  of  goods,  on  account  of  a  rise  or  fall  of  labour,  would 
depend  on  the  proportion  which  the  fixed  capital  bore  to  the 
whole  capital  employed.  All  commodities  which  are  produced 
by  very  valuable  machinery,  or  in  very  valuable  buildings,  or 
which  require  a  great  length  of  time  before  they  can  be  brought 
to  market,  would  fall  in  relative  value,  while  all  those  which 
were  chiefly  produced  by  labour,  or  which  would  be  speedily 
brought  to  market,  would  rise  in  relative  value. 

The  reader,  however,  should  remark  that  this  cause  of  the 
variation  of  commodities  is  comparatively  slight  in  its  effects. 
With  such  a  rise  of  wages  as  should  occasion  a  fall  oi  i  per  cent, 
in  profits,  goods  produced  under  the  circumstances  I  have  sup- 
posed vary  in  relative  value  only  i  per  cent. ;  they  fall  with  so 
great  a  fall  of  profits  from  £6050  to  £5995.  The  greatest  effects 
which  could  be  produced  on  the  relative  prices  of  these  goods 
from  a  rise  of  wages  could  not  exceed  6  or  7  per  cent.;  for 
profits  could  not,  probably,  under  any  circumstances,  admit 
of  a  greater  general  and  permanent  depression  than  to  that 
amount. 

Not  so  with  the  other  great  cause  of  the  variation  in  the  value 
of  commodities,  namely,  the  increase  or  diminution  in  the 
quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  produce  them.  If  to  produce 
the  com,  eighty,  instead  of  one  hundred  men,  should  be  required, 
the  value  of  the  com  would  fall  20  per  cent.,  or  from  £5500  to 
£4400.  If  to  produce  the  cloth,  the  labour  of  eighty  instead 
of  one  hundred  men  would  suffice,  cloth  would  fail  from  £6050 
to  £4950.  An  alteration  in  the  permanent  rate  of  profits,  to 
any  great  amount,  is  the  effect  of  causes  which  do  not  operate 
but  in  the  course  of  years,  whereas  alterations  in  the  quantity 
of  labour  necessary  to  produce  commodities  are  of  daily  occur- 
rence. Every  improvement  in  machinery,  in  tools,  in  buildings, 
in  raising  the  raw  material,  saves  labour,  and  enables  us  to 
produce  the  commodity  to  which  the  improvement  is  applied 
with  more  facility,  and  consequently  its  value  alters.  In 
estimating,  then,  the  causes  of  the  variations  in  the  value  of 
commodities,  although  it  would  be  wrong  wholly  to  omit  the 


hoi  ■ 


On  Value  23 

consideration  of  the  effect  produced  by  a  rise  or  fall  of  labour, 
it  would  be  equally  incorrect  to  attach  much  importance  to  it; 
and  consequently,  in  the  subsequent  part  of  this  work,  though 
I  shall  occasionally  refer  to  this  cause  of  variation,  I  shall  con- 
sider all  the  great  variations  which  take  place  in  the  relative 
value  of  commodities  to  be  produced  by  the  greater  or  less 
quantity  of  labour  which  may  be  required  from  time  to  time  to 
produce  them. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  commodities  which  have 
the  same  quantity  of  labour  bestowed  on  their  production  will 
differ  in  exchangeable  value  if  they  cannot  be  brought  to 
market  in  the  same  time. 

Suppose  I  employ  twenty  men  at  an  expense  of  £1000  for 
a  year  in  the  production  of  a  commodity,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
year  I  employ  twenty  men  again  for  another  year,  at  a  further 
expense  of  £1000  in  finishing  or  perfecting  the  same  commodity, 
and  that  I  bring  it  to  market  at  the  end  of  two  years,  if  profits 
be  10  per  cent.,  my  commodity  must  sell  for  £2310;  for  I  have 
employed  £1000  capital  for  one  year,  and  £2100  capital  for 
one  year  more.  Another  man  employs  precisely  the  same 
quantity  of  labour,  but  he  employs  it  all  in  the  first  year;  he 
employs  forty  men  at  an  expense  of  £2000,  and  at  the  end  of 
the  first  year  he  sells  it  with  10  per  cent,  profit,  or  for  £2200. 
Here,  then,  are  two  commodities  having  precisely  the  same 
quantity  of  labour  bestowed  on  them,  one  of  which  sells  for 
£2310 — the  other  for  £2200. 

This  case  appears  to  differ  from  the  last,  but  is,  in  fact,  the 
same.  In  both  cases  the  superior  price  of  one  commodity  is 
owing  to  the  greater  length  of  time  which  must  elapse  before  it 
can  be  brought  to  market.  In  the  former  case  the  machinery 
and  cloth  were  more  than  double  the  value  of  the  corn,  although 
only  double  the  quantity  of  labour  was  bestowed  on  them.  In 
the  second  case,  one  commodity  is  more  valuable  than  the  other, 
although  no  more  labour  was  employed  on  its  production.  The 
difference  in  value  arises  in  both  cases  from  the  profits  being 
accumulated  as  capital,  and  is  only  a  just  compensation  for  the 
time  that  the  profits  were  withheld. 

It  appears,  then,  that  the  division  of  capital  into  different 
proportions  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital,  employed  in  different 
trades,  introduces  a  considerable  modification  to  the  rule,  which 
is  of  universal  application  when  labour  is  almost  exclusively 
employed  in  production;  namely,  that  commodities  never  vary 
in  value  unless  a  greater  or  less  quantity  of  labour  be  bestowed 


24  Political  Economy 

on  their  production,  it  being  shown  in  this  section  that,  without 
any  variation  in  the  quantity  of  labour,  the  rise  of  its  value 
merely  v/ill  occasion  a  fall  in  the  exchangeable  value  of  those 
goods  in  the  production  of  which  fixed  capital  is  employed;  the 
larger  the  amount  of  fixed  capital,  the  greater  will  be  the  fall. 


SECTION  V 

The  principle  that  value  does  not  vary  with  the  rise  or  fall  of  wages, 
modified  also  by  the  unequal  durability  of  capital,  and  by  the  unequal 
rapidity  with  which  it  is  returned  to  its  employer 

In  the  last  section  we  have  supposed  that,  of  two  equal  capitals, 
in  two  different  occupations,  the  proportions  of  fixed  and  circu- 
lating capitals  were  unequal ;  now  let  us  suppose  them  to  be  in 
the  same  proportion,  but  of  unequal  durability.  In  proportion 
as  fixed  capital  is  less  durable  it  approaches  to  the  nature  of 
circulating  capital.  It  will  be  consumed  and  its  value  repro- 
duced in  a  shorter  time,  in  order  to  preserve  the  capital  of  the 
manufacturer.  We  have  just  seen  that  in  proportion  as  fixed 
capital  preponderates  in  a  manufacture,  when  wages  rise  the 
value  of  commodities  produced  in  that  manufacture  is  relatively 
lower  than  that  of  commodities  produced  in  manufactures  where 
circulating  capital  preponderates.  In  proportion  to  the  less 
durability  of  fixed  capital,  and  its  approach  to  the  nature  of 
circulating  capital,  the  same  effect  will  be  produced  by  the 
same  cause. 

If  fixed  capital  be  not  of  a  durable  nature  it  will  require  a 
great  quantity  of  labour  annually  to  keep  it  in  its  original  state 
of  efficiency;  but  the  labour  so  bestowed  may  be  considered 
as  really  expended  on  the  commodity  manufactured,  which 
must  bear  a  value  in  proportion  to  such  labour.  If  I  had  a 
machine  worth  £20,000  which  with  very  little  labour  was 
efficient  to  the  production  of  commodities,  and  if  the  wear  and 
tear  of  such  machine  were  of  trifling  amount,  and  the  general 
rate  of  profit  10  per  cent.,  I  should  not  require  much  more  than 
£2000  to  be  added  to  the  price  of  the  goods,  on  account  of  the 
employment  of  my  machine;  but  if  the  wear  and  tear  of  the 
machine  were  great,  if  the  quantity  of  labour  requisite  to  keep 
it  in  an  efficient  state  were  that  of  fifty  men  annually,  I  should 
require  an  additional  price  for  my  goods  equal  to  that  which 
would  be  obtained  by  any  other  manufacturer  who  employed 
fifty  men  in  the  production  of  other  goods,  and  who  used  no 
machinery  at  all. 


On  Value  25 

But  a  rise  in  the  wages  of  labour  would  not  equally  affect 
commodities  produced  with  machinery  quickly  consumed,  and 
commodities  produced  with  machinery  slowly  consumed.  In 
the  production  of  the  one,  a  great  deal  of  labour  would  be 
continually  transferred  to  the  commodity  produced — in  the 
other  very  little  would  be  so  transferred.  Every  rise  of  wages, 
therefore,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  every  fall  of  profits, 
would  lower  the  relative  value  of  *those  commodities  which 
were  produced  with  a  capital  of  a  durable  nature,  and  would 
proportionally  elevate  those  which  were  produced  with  capital 
more  perishable.  A  fall  of  wages  would  have  precisely  the 
contrary  effect. 

I  have  already  said  that  fixed  capital  is  of  various  degrees  of 
durability — suppose  now  a  machine  which  could  in  any  par- 
ticular trade  be  employed  to  do  the  work  of  one  hundred  men 
for  a  year,  and  that  it  would  last  only  for  one  year.  Suppose, 
too,  the  machine  to  cost  £5000,  and  the  wages  annually  paid 
to  one  hundred  men  to  be  £5000,  it  is  evident  that  it  would  be 
a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  manufacturer  whether  he  bought 
the  machine  or  employed  the  men.  But  suppose  labour  to  rise, 
and  consequently  the  wages  of  one  hundred  men  for  a  year  to 
amount  to  £5500,  it  is  obvious  that  the  manufacturer  would 
now  no  longer  hesitate,  it  would  be  for  his  interest  to  buy  the 
machine  and  get  his  work  done  for  £5000.  But  will  not  the 
machine  rise  in  price,  will  not  that  also  be  worth  £5500  in 
consequence  of  the  rise  of  labour?  It  would  rise  in  price  if 
there  were  no  stock  employed  on  its  construction,  and  no  profits 
to  be  paid  to  the  maker  of  it.  If,  for  example,  the  machine 
were  the  produce  of  the  labour  of  one  hundred  men,  working 
one  year  upon  it  with  wages  of  £50  each,  and  its  price  were 
consequently  £5000;  should  those  wages  rise  to  £55,  its  price 
would  be  £5500,  but  this  cannot  be  the  case;  less  than  one 
hundred  men  are  employed  or  it  could  not  be  sold  for  £5000, 
for  out  of  the  £5000  must  be  paid  the  profits  of  stock  which 
employed  the  men.  Suppose  then  that  only  eighty-five  men 
were  employed  at  an  expense  of  £50  each,  or  £4250  per  annum, 
and  that  the  £750  which  the  sale  of  the  machine  would  produce 
over  and  above  the  wages  advanced  to  the  men  constituted 
the  profits  of  the  engineer's  stock.  When  wages  rose  10  per 
cent.,  he  would  be  obliged  to  employ  an  additional  capital  of 
£425,  and  would  therefore  employ  £4675  instead  of  £4250,  on 
which  capital  he  v/ould  only  get  a  profit  of  £325  if  he  continued 
to  sell  his  machine  for  £5000;  but  this  is  precisely  the  case  of 


^ 


26  Political  Economy 

all  manufacturers  and  capitalists ;  the  rise  of  wages  affects  them 
all.  If  therefore  the  maker  of  the  machine  should  raise  the 
price  of  it  in  consequence  of  a  rise  of  wages,  an  unusual  quantity 
of  capital  would  be  employed  in  the  construction  of  such 
machines,  till  their  price  afforded  only  the  common  rate  of 
profits.^  We  see  then  that  machines  would  not  rise  in  price 
in  consequence  of  a  rise  of  wages. 

The  manufacturer,  however,  who  in  a  general  rise  of  wages 
can  have  recourse  to  a  machine  which  shall  not  increase  the 
charge  of  production  on  his  commodity,  would  enjoy  peculiar 
advantages  if  he  could  continue  to  charge  the  same  price  for 
his  goods;  but  he,  as  we  have  already  seen,  would  be  obliged 
to  lower  the  price  of  his  commodities,  or  capital  would  flow  to 
his  trade  till  his  profits  had  sunk  to  the  general  level.  Thus  then 
is  the  public  benefited  by  machinery:  these  mute  agents  are 
always  the  produce  of  much  less  labour  than  that  which  they 
displace,  even  when  they  are  of  the  same  money  value.  Through 
their  influence  an  increase  in  the  price  of  pro-visions  which  raises 
wages  will  affect  fewer  persons;  it  will  reach,  as  in  the  above 
instance,  eighty-five  men  instead  of  a  hundred,  and  the  saving 
which  is  the  consequence  shows  itself  in  the  reduced  price  of 
the  commodity  manufactured.  Neither  machines,  nor  the 
commodities  made  by  them,  rise  in  real  value,  but  all  com- 
modities made  by  machines  fall,  and  fall  in  proportion  to  their 
durability. 

It  will  be  seen  then,  that  in  the  early  stages  of  society,  before 
much  machinery  or  durable  capital  is  used,  the  commodities 
produced  by  equal  capitals  will  be  nearly  of  equal  value,  and 
will  rise  or  fall  only  relatively  to  each  other  on  account  of  more 
or  less  labour  being  required  for  their  production;  but  after 
the  introduction  of  these  expensive  and  durable  instruments, 
the  commodities  produced  by  the  employment  of  equal  capitals 
will  be  of  very  unequal  value,  and  although  they  will  still  be 
liable  to  rise  or  fall  relatively  to  each  other,  as  more  or  less 
labour  becomes  necessary  to  their  production,  they  will  be 
subject  to  another,  though  a  minor  variation,  also  from  tjie  rise 

^  We  here  see  why  it  is  that  old  countries  are  constantly  impelled  to 
employ  machinery,  and  new  countries  to  employ  labour.  With  every 
difficulty  of  providing  for  the  maintenance  of  men,  labour  necessarily  rises, 
and  with  every  rise  in  the  price  of  labour,  new  temptations  are  offered  to 
the  use  of  machinery.  This  difficulty  of  providing  for  the  maintenance  of 
men  is  in  constant  operation  in  old  countries;  in  new  ones  a  very  great 
increase  in  the  population  may  take  place  without  the  least  rise  in  the 
wages  of  labour.  It  may  be  as  easy  to  provide  for  the  seventh,  eighth,  and 
niuth  million  of  men  as  for  the  second,  third,  and  fourth. 


On  Value  27 

or  fall  of  wages  and  profits.  Since  goods  which  sell  for  £5000 
may  be  the  produce  of  a  capital  equal  in  amount  to  that  from 
which  are  produced  other  goods  which  sell  for  £10,000,  the 
profits  on  their  manufacture  will  be  the  same;  but  those  profits 
would  be  unequal  if  the  prices  of  the  goods  did  not  vary  with 
a  rise  or  fall  in  the  rate  of  profits. 

It  appears,  too,  that  in  proportion  to  the  durability  of  capital 
employed  in  any  kind  of  production  the  relative  prices  of  those 
commodities  on  which  such  durable  capital  is  employed  will 
vary  inversely  as  wages;  they  will  fall  as  wages  rise,  and  rise 
as  wages  fall;  and,  on  the  contrary,  those  which  are  produced 
chiefly  by  labour  with  less  fixed  capital,  or  with  fixed  capital 
of  a  less  durable  character  than  the  medium  in  which  price  is 
estimated,  will  rise  as  wages  rise,  and  fall  as  wages  fall. 

SECTION  VI  Ay^y 

'  On  an  invariable  measure  of  value  --'      X 

When  commodities  varied  in  relative  value  it  would  be  desir- 
able to  have  the  means  of  ascertaining  which  of  them  fell  and 
which  rose  in  real  value,  and  this  could  be  effected  only  by 
comparing  them  one  after  another  with  some  invariable  standard 
measure  of  value,  which  should  itself  be  subject  to  none  of  the 
fluctuations  to  which  other  commodities  are  exposed.  Of  such 
a  measure  it  is  impossible  to  be  possessed,  because  there  is  no 
commodity  which  is  not  itself  exposed  to  the  same  variations 
as  the  things  the  value  of  which  is  to  be  ascertained;  that  is, 
there  is  none  which  is  not  subject  to  require  more  or  less  labour 
for  its  production.  But  if  this  cause  of  variation  in  the  value 
of  a  medium  could  be  removed — if  it  were  possible  that  in  the 
production  of  our  money,  for  instance,  the  same  quantity  of 
labour  should  at  all  times  be  required,  still  it  would  not  be  a 
perfect  standard  or  invariable  measure  of  value,  because,  as  I 
have  already  endeavoured  to  explain,  it  would  be  subject  to 
relative  variations  from  a  rise  or  fall  of  wages,  on  account  ot 
the  different  proportions  of  fixed  capital  which  might  be  neces- 
sary to  produce  it,  and  to  produce  those  other  commodities 
whose  alteration  of  value  we  wished  to  ascertain.  It  might  be 
subject  to  variations,  too,  from  the  same  cause,  on  account  of 
the  different  degrees  of  durability  of  the  fixed  capital  employed 
on  it,  and  the  commodities  to  be  compared  with  it — or  the  time 
necessary  to  bring  the  one  to  market  might  be  longer  or  shorter 
than  the  time  necessary  to  bring  the  other  commodities  to 


28  Political  Economy 


market,  the  variations  of  which  were  to  be  determined;  ai 
which  circumstances  disquaUfy  any  commodity  that  can  be 
thought  of  from  being  a  perfectly  accurate  measure  of  value. 

If,  for  example,  we  were  to  fix  on  gold  as  a  standard,  it  is 
evident  that  it  is  but  a  commodity  obtained  under  the  same 
contingencies  as  every  other  commodity,  and  requiring  labour 
and  fixed  capital  to  produce  it.  Like  every  other  commodity', 
improvements  in  the  saving  of  labour  might  be  applied  to  its 
production,  and  consequently  it  might  fall  in  relative  value 
to  other  things  merely  on  account  of  the  greater  facility  of 
producing  it. 

If  we  suppose  this  cause  of  variation  to  be  removed,  and  the 
same  quantity  of  labour  to  be  always  required  to  obtain  the 
same  quantity  of  gold,  still  gold  would  not  be  a  perfect  measure 
of  value,  by  which  we  could  accurately  ascertain  the  variations 
in  all  other  things,  because  it  would  not  be  produced  with  pre- 
cisely the  same  combinations  of  fixed  and  circulating  capital  as 
all  other  things;  nor  with  fixed  capital  of  the  same  durability; 
nor  would  it  require  precisely  the  same  length  of  time  before 
it  could  be  brought  to  market.  It  would  be  a  perfect  measure 
of  value  for  all  things  produced  under  the  same  circumstances 
precisely  as  itself,  but  for  no  others.  If,  for  example,  it  were 
produced  under  the  same  circumstances  as  we  have  supposed 
necessary  to  produce  cloth  and  cotton  goods,  it  would  be  a 
perfect  measure  of  value  for  those  things,  but  not  so  for  com, 
for  coals,  and  other  commodities  produced  with  either  a  less  or 
a  greater  proportion  of  fixed  capital,  because,  as  we  have  shown, 
every  alteration  in  the  permanent  rate  of  profits  would  have 
some  effect  on  the  relative  value  of  all  these  goods,  independently 
of  any  alteration  in  the  quantity  of  labour  employed  on  their 
production.  If  gold  were  produced  under  the  same  circum- 
stances as  com,  even  if  they  never  changed,  it  would  not,  for 
the  same  reasons,  be  at  all  times  a  perfect  measure  of  the  value 
of  cloth  and  cotton  goods.  Neither  gold,  then,  nor  any  other 
commodity,  can  ever  be  a  perfect  measure  of  value  for  all  things; 
but  I  have  already  remarked  that  the  effect  on  the  relative 
prices  of  things,  from  a  variation  in  profits,  is  comparatively 
slight;  that  by  far  the  most  important  effects  are  produced  by 
the  varying  quantities  of  labour  required  for  production;  and 
therefore,  if  we  suppose  this  important  cause  of  variation 
removed  from  the  production  of  gold,  we  shall  probably  possess 
as  near  an  approximation  to  a  standard  measure  of  value  as 
can  be  theoretically  conceived.    May  not  gold  be  considered  as 


On  Value  29 

a  commodity  produced  with  such  proportions  of  the  two  kinds 
of  capital  as  approach  nearest  to  the  average  quantity  employed 
in  the  production  of  most  commodities?  May  not  these  pro- 
portions be  so  nearly  equally  distant  from  the  two  extremes, 
the  one  where  little  fixed  capital  is  used,  the  other  where 
little  labour  is  employed,  as  to  form  a  just  mean  between 
them? 

If,  then,  I  may  suppose  myself  to  be  possessed  of  a  standard 
so  nearly  approaching  to  an  invariable  one,  the  advantage  is 
that  I  shall  be  enabled  to  speak  of  the  variations  of  other  things 
without  embarrassing  myself  on  every  occasion  with  the  con- 
sideration of  the  possible  alteration  in  the  value  of  the  medium 
in  which  price  and  value  are  estimated. 

To  facilitate,  then,  the  object  of  this  inquiry,  although  I 
fully  allow  that  money  made  of  gold  is  subject  to  most  of  the 
variations  of  other  things,  I  shall  suppose  it  to  be  invariable, 
and  therefore  all  alterations  in  price  to  be  occasioned  by  some 
alteration  in  the  value  of  the  commodity  of  which  I  may  be 
speaking. 

Before  I  quit  this  subject,  it  may  be  proper  to  observe  that 
Adam  Smith,  and  all  the  writers  who  have  followed  him,  have, 
without  one  exception  that  I  know  of,  maintained  that  a  rise 
in  the  price  of  labour  would  be  uniformly  followed  by  a  rise  in 
the  price  of  all  commodities.  I  hope  I  have  succeeded  in  show- 
ing that  there  are  no  grounds  for  such  an  opinion,  and  that 
only  those  commodities  would  rise  which  had  less  fixed  capital 
employed  upon  them  than  the  medium  in  which  price  was 
estimated,  and  that  all  those  which  had  more  would  positively 
fall  in  price  when  wages  rose.  On  the  contrary,  if  wages  fell, 
those  commodities  only  would  fall  which  had  a  less  proportion 
of  fixed  capital  employed  on  them  than  the  medium  in  which 
price  was  estimated;  all  those  which  had  more  would  positively 
rise  in  price. 

It  is  necessary  for  me  also  to  remark  that  I  have  not  said, 
because  one  commodity  has  so  much  labour  bestowed  upon  it 
as  will  cost  £1000,  and  another  so  much  as  will  cost  £2000, 
that  therefore  one  would  be  of  the  value  of  £1000,  and  the  other 
of  the  value  of  £2000;  but  I  have  said  that  their  value  will  be 
to  each  other  as  two  to  one,  and  that  in  those  proportions  they 
will  be  exchanged.  It  is  of  no  importance  to  the  truth  of  this 
doctrine  whether  one  of  these  commodities  sells  for  £1100  and 
the  other  for  £2200,  or  one  for  £1500  and  the  other  for  £3000; 
into  that  question  I  do  not  at  present  inquire;   I  affirm  only 


30  Political  Economy 

that  their  relative  values  will  be  governed  by  the  relative 
quantities  of  labour  bestowed  on  their  production.^ 


SECTION  VII 

Different  effects  from  the  alteration  in  the  value  of  money,  the  medium  in 
which  PRICE  is  always  expressed,  or  from  the  alteration  in  the  value 
of  the  commodities  which  money  purchases 

Although  I  shall,  as  I  have  already  explained,  have  occasion 
to  consider  money  as  invariable  in  value,  for  the  purpose  of 
more  distinctly  pointing  out  the  causes  of  relative  variations  in 
the  value  of  other  things,  it  may  be  useful  to  notice  the  different 
effects  which  will  follow  from  the  prices  of  goods  being  altered 
by  the  causes  to  which  I  have  already  adverted,  namely,  the 
different  quantities  of  labour  required  to  produce  them,  and  their 
being  altered  by  a  variation  in  the  value  of  money  itself. 

Money  being  a  variable  commodity,  the  rise  of  money-wages 
will  be  frequently  occasioned  by  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money. 
A  rise  of  wages  from  this  cause  will,  indeed,  be  invariably 
accompanied  by  a  rise  in  the  price  of  commodities ;  but  in  such 
cases  it  will  be  found  that  labour  and  all  commodities  have  not 
varied  in  regard  to  each  other,  and  that  the  variation  has  been 
confined  to  money. 

Money,  from  its  being  a  commodity  obtained  from  a  foreign 
country,  from  its  being  the  general  medium  of  exchange  between 
all  civilised  countries,  and  from  its  being  also  distributed  among 
those  countries  in  proportions  which  are  ever  changing  with 
ever)'^  improvement  in  commerce  and  machinery,  and  with  every 
increasing  difficulty  of  obtaining  food  and  necessaries  for  an 
increasing  population,  is  subject  to  incessant  variations.  In 
stating  the  principles  which  regulate  exchangeable  value  and 
price,  we  should  carefully  distinguish  between  those  variations 
which  belong  to  the  commodity  itself,  and  those  which  are 
occasioned  by  a  variation  in  the  medium  in  which  value  is 
estimated  or  price  expressed. 

*  Mr.  Malthus  remarks  on  this  doctrine,  "  We  have  the  power  indeed, 
arbitrarily,  to  call  the  labour  which  has  been  employed  upon  a  commodity 
its  real  value,  but  in  so  doing  we  use  words  in  a  different  sense  from  that 
in  which  they  are  customarily  used;  we  confound  at  once  the  very  im- 
portant distinction  between  cost  and  value  ;  and  render  it  almost  impossible 
to  explain  with  clearness  the  main  stimulus  to  the  production  of  wealth, 
which  in  fact  depends  upon  this  distinction." 

Mr.  Malthus  appears  to  think  that  it  is  a  part  of  my  doctrine  that  the 
cost  and  value  of  a  thing  should  be  the  same;  it  is,  if  he  means  by  cost, 
'*  cost  of  production  "  including  profits.  In  the  above  passage,  this  is 
what  he  does  not  mean,  and  therefore  he  has  not  clearly  understood  me. 


I 
I 


On  Value  31 

A  rise  in  wages,  from  an  alteration  in  the  value  of  money, 
produces  a  general  effect  on  price,  and  for  that  reason  it  pro- 
duces no  real  effect  whatever  on  profits.  On  the  contrary,  a 
rise  of  wages,  from  the  circumstance  of  the  labourer  being  more 
liberally  rewarded,  or  from  a  difficulty  of  procuring  the  neces- 
saries on  which  wages  are  expended,  does  not,  except  in  some 
instances,  produce  the  effect  of  raising  price,  but  has  a  great 
effect  in  lowering  profits.  In  the  one  case,  no  greater  proportion 
of  the  annual  labour  of  the  country  is  devoted  to  the  support  of 
the  labourers;   in  the  other  case,  a  larger  portion  is  so  devoted. 

It  is  according  to  the  division  of  the  whole  produce  of  the  land 
of  any  particular  farm,  between  the  three  classes,  of  landlord, 
capitalist,  and  labourer,  that  we  are  to  judge  of  the  rise  or  fall 
of  rent,  profit,  and  wages,  and  not  according  to  the  value  at 
which  that  produce  may  be  estimated  in  a  medium  which  is 
confessedly  variable. 

It  is  not  by  the  absolute  quantity  of  produce  obtained  by 
either  class  that  we  can  correctly  judge  of  the  rate  of  profit, 
rent,  and  wages,  but  by  the  quantity  of  labour  required  to 
obtain  that  produce.  By  improvements  in  machinery  and 
agriculture  the  whole  produce  may  be  doubled;  but  if  wages, 
rent,  and  profit  be  also  doubled,  these  three  will  bear  the  same 
proportions  to  one  another  as  before,  and  neither  could  be  said 
to  have  relatively  varied.  But  if  wages  partook  not  of  the  whole 
of  this  increase;  if  they,  instead  of  being  doubled,  were  only 
increased  one-half;  if  rent,  instead  of  being  doubled,  were  only 
increased  three-fourths,  and  the  remaining  increase  went  to 
profit,  it  would,  I  apprehend,  be  correct  for  me  to  say  that 
rent  and  wages  had  fallen  while  profits  had  risen;  for  if  we  had 
an  invariable  standard  by  which  to  measure  the  value  of  this 
produce  we  should  find  that  a  less  value  had  fallen  to  the 
class  of  labourers  and  landlords,  and  a  greater  to  the  class  of 
capitalists,  than  had  been  given  before.  We  might  find,  for 
example,  that  though  the  absolute  quantity  of  commodities  had 
been  doubled,  they  were  the  produce  of  precisely  the  former 
quantity  of  labour.  Of  every  hundred  hats,  coats,  and  quarters 
of  corn  produced,  if 

The  labourers  had  before     .     ,     .25 

The  landlords 25 

And  the  capitalists 50 

100: 


32  Political  Economy 

And  if,  after  these  commodities  were  double  the  quantity,  of 

every  loo 

The  labourers  had  only  ....     22 

The  landlords 22 

And  the  capitalists 56 

100: 

In  that  case  I  should  say  that  wages  and  rent  had  fallen  and 
profits  risen;  though,  in  consequence  of  the  abundance  of 
commodities,  the  quantity  paid  to  the  labourer  and  landlord 
would  have  increased  in  the  proportion  of  25  to  44.  Wages 
are  to  be  estimated  by  their  real  value,  viz.,  by  the  quantity  of 
labour  and  capital  employed  in  producing  them,  and  not  by 
their  nominal  value  either  in  coats,  hats,  money,  or  corn. 
Under  the  circumstances  I  have  just  supposed,  commodities 
would  have  fallen  to  half  their  former  value,  and  if  money  had 
not  varied,  to  half  their  former  price  also.  If  then  in  this 
medium_,  which  had  not  varied  in  value,  the  wages  of  the  labourer 
should  be  found  to  have  fallen,  it  will  not  the  less  be  a  real  fall 
because  they  might  furnish  him  with  a  greater  quantity  of  cheap 
commodities  than  his  former  wages. 

The  variation  in  the  value  of  money,  however  great,  makes  no 
difference  in  the  rate  of  profits;  for  suppose  the  goods  of  the 
manufacturer  to  rise  from  £1000  to  £2000,  or  100  per  cent.,  if  his 
capital,  on  which  the  variations  of  money  have  as  much  effect 
as  on  the  value  of  produce,  if  his  machinery,  buildings,  and 
stock  in  trade  rise  also  a  100  per  cent.,  his  rate  of  profits  will  be 
the  same,  and  he  will  have  the  same  quantity,  and  no  more, 
of  the  produce  of  the  labour  of  the  country  at  his  command. 

If,  with  a  capital  of  a  given  value,  he  can,  by  economy  in 
labour,  double  the  quantity  of  produce,  and  it  fall  to  half  its 
former  price,  it  will  bear  the  same  proportion  to  the  capital  that 
produced  it  which  it  did  before,  and  consequently  profits  will 
still  be  at  the  same  rate. 

If,  at  the  same  time  that  he  doublets  the  quantity  of  produce 
by  the  emplo>Tnent  of  the  same  capital,  the  value  of  money  is 
by  any  accident  lowered  one  half,  the  produce  will  sell  for  twice 
the  money  value  that  it  did  before;  but  the  capital  employed 
to  produce  it  will  also  be  of  twice  its  former  money  value;  and 
therefore  in  this  case,  too,  the  value  of  the  produce  will  bear  tb.fi 
same  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  capital  as  it  did  before;  and 
although  the  produce  be  doubled,  rent,  wages,  and  profits  will 
only  vary  as  the  proportions  vary,  in  which  this  double  produce 
may  be  divided  among  the  three  classes  that  share  it. 


I 


1 


CHAPTER  II 

ON   RENT 

It  remains  however  to  be  considered  whether  the  appropriation 
of  land,  and  the  consequent  creation  of  rent,  will  occasion  any 
variation  in  the  relative  value  of  commodities  independently 
of  the  quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  production.  In  order 
to  understand  this  part  of  the  subject  we  must  inquire  into 
the  nature  of  rent,  and  the  laws  by  which  its  rise  or  fall  is 
regulated. 

Rent  is  that  portion  of  the  produce  of  the  earth  which  is  paid 
to  the  landlord  for  the  use  of  the  original  and  indestructible 
powers  of  the  soil.  It  is  often,  however,  confounded  with  the 
interest  and  profit  of  capital,  and,  in  popular  language,  the 
term  is  applied  to  whatever  is  annually  paid  by  a  farmer  to  his 
landlord.  If,  of  two  adjoining  farms  of  the  same  extent,  and 
of  the  same  natural  fertility,  one  had  all  the  conveniences  of 
farming  buildings,  and,  besides,  were  properly  drained  and 
manured,  and  advantageously  divided  by  hedges,  fences,  and 
walls,  while  the  other  had  none  of  these  advantages,  more 
remuneration  would  naturally  be  paid  for  the  use  of  one  than 
for  the  use  of  the  other;  yet  in  both  cases  this  remuneration 
would  be  called  rent.  But  it  is  evident  that  a  portion  only 
of  the  money  annually  to  be  paid  for  the  improved  farm  would 
be  given  for  the  original  and  indestructible  powers  of  the  soil; 
the  other  portion  would  be  paid  for  the  use  of  the  capital  which 
had  been  employed  in  ameliorating  the  quality  of  the  land,  and 
in  erecting  such  buildings  as  were  necessary  to  secure  and 
preserve  the  produce.  Adam  Smith  sometimes  speaks  of  rent 
in  the  strict  sense  to  which  I  am  desirous  of  confining  it,  but 
more  often  in  the  popular  sense  in  which  the  term  is  usually 
employed.  He  tells  us  that  the  demand  for  timber,  and  its 
consequent  high  price,  in  the  more  southern  countries  of  Europe 
caused  a  rent  to  be  paid  for  forests  in  Norway  which  could 
before  afford  no  rent.  Is  it  not,  however,  evident  that  the 
person  who  paid  what  he  thus  calls  rent,  paid  it  in  consideration 
of  the  valuable  commodity  which  was  then  standing  on  the  land, 

33  C 


34  Political  Economy 

and  that  he  actually  repaid  himself  with  a  profit  by  the  sale 
of  the  timber?  If,  indeed,  after  the  timber  was  removed,  any 
compensation  were  paid  to  the  landlord  for  the  use  of  the  land, 
for  the  purpose  of  growing  timber  or  any  other  produce,  with 
a  view  to  future  demand,  such  compensation  might  justly  be 
called  rent,  because  it  would  be  paid  for  the  productive  powers 
of  the  land;  but  in  the  case  stated  by  Adam  Smith,  the  com- 
pensation was  paid  for  the  liberty  of  removing  and  selling  the 
timber,  and  not  for  the  liberty  of  growing  it.  He  speaks  also 
of  the  rent  of  coal  mines,  and  of  stone  quarries,  to  which  the 
same  observation  applies — that  the  compensation  given  for  the 
mine  or  quarry  is  paid  for  the  value  of  the  coal  or  stone  which 
can  be  removed  from  them,  and  has  no  connection  with  the 
original  and  indestructible  powers  of  the  land.  This  is  a  dis- 
tinction of  great  importance  in  an  inquiry  concerning  rent  and 
profits ;  for  it  is  found  that  the  laws  which  regulate  the  progress 
of  rent  are  widely  different  from  those  which  regulate  the 
progress  of  profits,  and  seldom  operate  in  the  same  direction. 
In  all  improved  countries,  that  which  is  annually  paid  to  the 
landlord,  partaking  of  both  characters,  rent  and  profit,  is  some- 
times kept  stationary  by  the  effects  of  opposing  causes;  at 
other  times  advances  or  recedes  as  one  or  the  other  of  these 
causes  preponderates.  In  the  future  pages  of  this  work,  then, 
whenever  I  speak  of  the  rent  of  land,  I  wish  to  be  understood 
as  speaking  of  that  compensation  which  is  paid  to  the  owner  of 
land  for  the  use  of  its  original  and  indestructible  powers. 

On  the  first  settling  of  a  country  in  which  there  is  an  abun- 
dance of  rich  and  fertile  land,  a  very  small  proportion  of  which 
is  required  to  be  cultivated  for  the  support  of  the  actual  popu- 
lation, or  indeed  can  be  cultivated  with  the  capital  which  the 
population  can  command,  there  will  be  no  rent;  for  no  one 
would  pay  for  the  use  of  land  when  there  was  an  abundant 
quantity  not  yet  appropriated,  and,  therefore,  at  the  disposal 
of  whosoever  might  choose  to  cultivate  it. 

On  the  common  principles  of  supply  and  demand,  no  rent 
could  be  paid  for  such  land,  for  the  reason  stated  why  nothing 
is  given  for  the  use  of  air  and  water,  or  for  any  other  of  the  gifts 
of  nature  which  exist  in  boundless  quantity.  With  a  given 
quantity  of  materials,  and  with  the  assistance  of  the  pressure 
of  the  atmosphere,  and  the  elasticity  of  steam,  engines  may 
perform  work,  and  abridge  human  labour  to  a  very  great  extent; 
but  no  charge  is  made  for  the  use  of  these  natural  aids,  because 
they  are  inexhaustible  and  at  every  man's  disposal.     In  the 


ale  ■ 
ny  ■ 
id.     ■ 


On  Rent  35 

same  manner,  the  brewer,  the  distiller,  the  dyer,  make  incessant 
use  of  the  air  and  water  for  the  production  of  their  commodities; 
but  as  the  supply  is  boundless,  they  bear  no  price.^  If  all  land 
had  the  same  properties,  if  it  were  unlimited  in  quantity,  and 
uniform  in  quality,  no  charge  could  be  made  for  its  use,  unless 
where  it  possessed  peculiar  advantages  of  situation.  It  is  only, 
then,  because  land  is  not  unlimited  in  quantity  and  uniform  in 
quality,  and  because,  in  the  progress  of  population,  land  of  an 
inferior  quality,  or  less  advantageously  situated,  is  called  into 
cultivation,  that  rent  is  ever  paid  for  the  use  of  it.  When,  in 
the  progress  of  society,  land  of  the  second  degree  of  fertility  is 
taken  into  cultivation,  rent  immediately  commences  on  that 
of  the  first  quality,  and  the  amount  of  that  rent  will  depend  on 
the  difference  in  the  quality  of  these  two  portions  of  land. 

When  land  of  the  third  quality  is  taken  into  cultivation,  rent 
immediately  commences  on  the  second,  and  it  is  regulated  as 
before  by  the  difference  in  their  productive  powers.  At  the 
same  time,  the  rent  of  the  first  quality  will  rise,  for  that  must 
always  be  above  the  rent  of  the  second  by  the  difference  between 
the  produce  which  they  yield  with  a  given  quantity  of  capital 
and  labour.  With  ever>'  step  in  the  progress  of  population, 
which  shall  oblige  a  country  to  have  recourse  to  land  of  a  worse 
quality,  to  enable  it  to  raise  its  supply  of  food,  rent,  on  all  the 
more  fertile  land,  will  rise. 

Thus  suppose  land  —  No.  i,  2,  3  — to  yield,  with  an  equal 
employment  of  capital  and  labour,  a  net  produce  of  loo,  90, 
and  80  quarters  of  corn.  In  a  new  country,  where  there  is  an 
abundance  of  fertile  land  compared  with  the  population,  and 
where  therefore  it  is  only  necessary  to  cultivate  No.  i,  the 
whole  net  produce  will  belong  to  the  cultivator,  and  will  be  the 
profits  of  the  stock  which  he  advances.  As  soon  as  population 
had  so  far  increased  as  to  make  it  necessary  to  cultivate  No.  2, 
from  which  ninety  quarters  only  can  be  obtained  after  support- 
ing the  labourers,  rent  would  commence  on  No.  i;  for  either 
there  must  be  two  rates  of  profit  on  agricultural  capital,  or  ten 

'  "  The  earth,  as  we  have  already  seen,  is  not  the  only  agent  of  nature 
which  has  a  productive  power;  but  it  is  the  only  one,  or  nearly  so,  that  one 
set  of  men  take  to  themselves  to  the  exclusion  of  others;  and  of  which, 
consequently,  they  can  appropriate  the  benefits.  The  waters  of  rivers, 
and  of  the  sea,  by  the  power  which  they  have  of  giving  movement  to  our 
machines,  carrying  our  boats,  nourishing  our  fish,  have  also  a  productive 
power ;  the  wind  which  turns  our  mills,  and  even  the  heat  of  the  sun,  work 
for  us ;  but  happily  no  one  has  yet  been  able  to  say,  the  '  wind  and  the  sun 
are  mine,  and  the  service  which  they  render  must  be  paid  for.'  " — Econcmie 
Politique,  par  J.  B.  Say,  vol.  ii,  p.  124. 


36  Political  Economy 

quarters,  or  the  value  of  ten  quarters  must  be  withdrawn  from 
the  produce  of  No.  i  for  some  other  purpose.  Whether  the 
proprietor  of  the  land,  or  any  other  person,  cultivated  No.  i, 
these  ten  quarters  would  equally  constitute  rent;  for  the  culti- 
vator of  No.  2  would  get  the  same  result  with  his  capital  whether 
he  cultivated  No.  i,  paying  ten  quarters  for  rent,  or  continued 
to  cultivate  No.  2,  paying  no  rent.  In  the  same  manner  it 
might  be  shown  that  when  No.  3  is  brought  into  cultivation, 
the  rent  of  No.  2  must  be  ten  quarters,  or  the  value  of  ten 
quarters,  whilst  the  rent  of  No.  i  would  rise  to  twenty  quarters; 
for  the  cultivator  of  No.  3  would  have  the  same  profits  whether 
he  paid  twenty  quarters  for  the  rent  of  No.  i,  ten  quarters  for 
the  rent  of  No.  2,  or  cultivated  No.  3  free  of  all  rent. 

It  often,  and,  indeed,  commonly  happens,  that  before  No.  2, 
3,  4,  or  5,  or  the  inferior  lands  are  cultivated,  capital  can  be 
employed  more  productively  on  those  lands  which  are  already 
in  cultivation.  It  may  perhaps  be  found  that  by  doubling  the 
original  capital  employed  on  No.  i,  though  the  produce  will  not 
be  doubled,  will  not  be  increased  by  100  quarters,  it  may  be 
increased  by  eighty-five  quarters,  and  that  this  quantity  exceeds 
what  could  be  obtained  by  employing  the  same  capital  on 
land  No.  3. 

In  such  case,  capital  will  be  preferably  employed  on  the  old 
land,  and  will  equally  create  a  rent;  for  rent  is  always  the 
difference  between  the  produce  obtained  by  the  employment  of 
two  equal  quantities  of  capital  and  labour.  If,  with  a  capital 
of  £1000  a  tenant  obtain  100  quarters  of  wheat  from  his  land, 
and  by  the  employment  of  a  second  capital  of  £1000  he  obtain 
a  further  return  of  eighty-five,  his  landlord  would  have  the 
power,  at  the  expiration  of  his  lease,  of  obliging  him  to  pay 
fifteen  quarters  or  an  equivalent  value  for  additional  rent;  for 
there  cannot  be  two  rates  of  profit.  If  he  is  satisfied  with  a 
diminution  of  fifteen  quarters  in  the  return  for  his  second 
£1000,  it  is  because  no  employment  more  profitable  can  be 
found  for  it.  The  common  rate  of  profit  would  be  in  that 
proportion,  and  if  the  original  tenant  refused,  some  other  person 
would  be  found  willing  to  give  all  which  exceeded  that  rate  of 
profit  to  the  owner  of  the  land  from  which  he  derived  it. 

In  this  case,  as  well  as  in  the  other,  the  capital  last  employed 
pays  no  rent.  For  the  greater  productive  powers  of  the  first 
£1000,  fifteen  quarters,  is  paid  for  rent,  for  the  employment  of 
the  second  £1000  no  rent  whatever  is  paid.  If  a  third  £1000 
be  employed  on  the  same  land,  with  a  return  of  seventy-five 


On  Rent  37 

quarters,  rent  will  then  be  paid  for  the  second  £1000,  and  will 
be  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  produce  of  these  two, 
or  ten  quarters;  and  at  the  same  time  the  rent  for  the  first 
£1000  will  rise  from  fifteen  to  twenty-five  quarters;  while  the 
last  £1000  will  pay  no  rent  whatever. 

If,  then,  good  land  existed  in  a  quantity  much  more  abundant 
than  the  production  of  food  for  an  increasing  population  required, 
or  if  capital  could  be  indefinitely  employed  without  a  diminished 
return  on  the  old  land,  there  could  be  no  rise  of  rent;  for  rent 
invariably  proceeds  from  the  employment  of  an  additional 
quantity  of  labour  with  a  proportionally  less  return. 

The  most  fertile  and  most  favourably  situated  land  will  be 
first  cultivated,  and  the  exchangeable  value  of  its  produce  will 
be  adjusted  in  the  same  manner  as  the  exchangeable  value  of 
all  other  commodities,  by  the  total  quantity  of  labour  necessary 
in  various  forms,  from  first  to  last,  to  produce  it  and  bring  it 
to  market.  When  land  of  an  inferior  quality  is  taken  into 
cultivation,  the  exchangeable  value  of  raw  produce  will  rise, 
because  more  labour  is  required  to  produce  it. 

The  exchangeable  value  of  all  commodities,  whether  they  be 
manufactured,  or  the  produce  of  the  mines,  or  the  produce  of 
land,  is  always  regulated,  not  by  the  less  quantity  of  labour 
that  will  suffice  for  their  production  under  circumstances  highly 
favourable,  and  exclusively  enjoyed  by  those  who  have  peculiar 
facilities  of  production;  but  by  the  greater  quantity  of  labour 
necessarily  bestowed  on  their  production  by  those  who  have  no 
such  facilities;  by  those  who  continue  to  produce  them  under 
the  most  unfavourable  circumstances;  meaning — by  the  most 
unfavourable  circumstances,  the  most  unfavourable  under 
which  the  quantity  of  produce  required  renders  it  necessary  to 
carry  on  the  production. 

Thus,  in  a  charitable  institution,  where  the  poor  are  set  to 
work  with  the  funds  of  benefactors,  the  general  prices  of  the 
commodities,  which  are  the  produce  of  such  work,  will  not  be 
governed  by  the  peculiar  facilities  afforded  to  these  workmen, 
but  by  the  common,  usual,  and  natural  difficulties  which  every 
other  manufacturer  will  have  to  encounter.  The  manufacturer 
enjoying  none  of  these  facilities  might  indeed  be  driven  alto- 
gether from  the  market  if  the  supply  afforded  by  these  favoured 
workmen  were  equal  to  all  the  wants  of  the  community;  but 
if  he  continued  the  trade,  it  would  be  only  on  conditior  that  he 
should  derive  from  it  the  usual  and  general  rate  of  profit?  on 
stock;   and  that  could  only  happen  when  his  commodity  sold 


38  Political  Economy 

for  a  price  proportioned  to  the  quantity  of  labour  bestowed 
its  production.^ 

It  is  true,  that  on  the  best  land,  the  same  produce  would  still 
be  obtained  with  the  same  labour  as  before,  but  its  value  would 
be  enhanced  in  consequence  of  the  diminished  returns  obtained 
by  those  who  employed  fresh  labour  and  stock  on  the  less  fertile 
land.  Notwithstanding,  then,  that  the  advantages  of  fertile 
over  inferior  lands  are  in  no  case  lost,  but  only  transferred  from 
the  cultivator,  or  consumer,  to  the  landlord,  yet,  since  more 
labour  is  required  on  the  inferior  lands,  and  since  it  is  from  such 
land  only  that  we  are  enabled  to  furnish  ourselves  with  the 
additional  supply  of  raw  produce,  the  comparative  value  of 
that  produce  will  continue  permanently  above  its  former  level, 
and  make  it  exchange  for  more  hats,  cloth,  shoes,  etc.,  etc.,  in 
the  production  of  which  no  such  additional  quantity  of  labour 
is  required. 

The  reason,  then,  why  raw  produce  rises  in  comparative  value 
is  because  more  labour  is  employed  in  the  production  of  the 
last  portion  obtained,  and  not  because  a  rent  is  paid  to  the 
landlord.  The  value  of  com  is  regulated  by  the  quantity  of 
labour  bestowed  on  its  production  on  that  quaHty  of  land,  or 
with  that  portion  of  capital,  which  pays  no  rent.  Com  is  not 
high  because  a  rent  is  paid,  but  a  rent  is  paid  because  com  is 
high ;  and  it  has  been  justly  observed  that  no  reduction  would 
take  place  in  the  price  of  com  although  landlords  should  forego 
the  whole  of  their  rent.  Such  a  measure  would  only  enable 
some  farmers  to  live  like  gentlemen,  but  would  not  diminish 

^  Has  not  M.  Say  forgotten,  in  the  following  passage,  that  it  is  the  cost 
of  production  which  ultimately  regulates  price?  "  The  produce  of  labour 
employed  on  the  land  has  this  peculiar  property,  that  it  does  not  become 
more  dear  by  becoming  more  scarce,  because  population  always  diminishes 
at  the  same  time  that  food  diminishes,  and  consequently  the  quantity  of 
these  products  demanded  diminishes  at  the  same  time  as  the  quantity 
supplied.  Besides,  it  is  not  observed  that  corn  is  more  dear  in  those  places 
where  there  is  plenty  of  uncultivated  land,  than  in  completely  cultivated 
countries.  England  and  France  were  much  more  imperfectly  cultivated  in 
the  middle  ages  than  they  are  now;  they  produced  much  less  raw  produce: 
nevertheless,  from  all  that  we  can  judge  by  a  comparison  with  the  value 
of  other  things,  corn  was  not  sold  at  a  dearer  price.  If  the  produce  was 
less,  so  was  the  population ;  the  weakness  of  the  demand  compensated  the 
feebleness  of  the  supply  "  (vol.  ii.  338).  M.  Say  being  impressed  with  the 
opinion  that  the  price  of  commodities  is  regulated  by  the  price  of  labour, 
and  justly  supposing  that  charitable  institutions  of  all  sorts  tend  to  increase 
the  population  beyond  what  it  otherwise  would  be,  and  therefore  to  lower 
wages,  says,  "  I  suspect  that  the  cheapness  of  the  goods  which  come  from 
England  is  partly  caused  by  the  numerous  charitable  institutions  which 
exist  in  that  country  "  (vol.  ii.  277).  This  is  a  consistent  opinion  in  one 
who  maintains  that  wages  regulate  price. 


™ 


On  Rent  39 

the  quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  raise  raw  produce  on  the 
least  productive  land  in  cultivation. 

Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  hear  of  the  advantages 
which  the  land  possesses  over  every  other  source  of  useful 
produce,  on  account  of  the  surplus  which  it  yields  in  the  form 
of  rent.  Yet  when  land  is  most  abundant,  when  most  pro- 
ductive, and  most  fertile,  it  yields  no  rent;  and  it  is  only  when 
its  powers  decay,  and  less  is  yielded  in  return  for  labour,  that 
a  share  of  the  original  produce  of  the  more  fertile  portions  is 
set  apart  for  rent.  It  is  singular  that  this  quality  in  the  land, 
which  should  have  been  noticed  as  an  imperfection  compared 
with  the  natural  agents  by  which  manufacturers  are  assisted, 
should  have  been  pointed  out  as  constituting  its  peculiar  pre- 
eminence. If  air,  water,  the  elasticity  of  steam,  and  the  pressure 
of  the  atmosphere  were  of  various  qualities;  if  they  could  be 
appropriated,  and  each  quality  existed  only  in  moderate  abund- 
ance, they,  as  well  as  the  land,  would  afford  a  rent,  as  the 
successive  qualities  were  brought  into  use.  With  every  worse 
quality  employed,  the  value  of  the  commodities  in  the  manu- 
facture of  which  they  were  used  would  rise,  because  equal 
quantities  of  labour  would  be  less  productive.  Man  would  do 
more  by  the  sweat  of  his  brow  and  nature  perform  less;  and 
the  land  would  be  no  longer  pre-eminent  for  its  limited  powers. 

If  the  surplus  produce  which  land  affords  in  the  form  of  rent 
be  an  advantage,  it  is  desirable  that,  every  year,  the  machinery 
newly  constructed  should  be  less  efficient  than  the  old,  as  that 
would  undoubtedly  give  a  greater  exchangeable  value  to  the 
goods  manufactured,  not  only  by  that  machinery  but  by  all 
the  other  machinery  in  the  kingdom ;  and  a  rent  would  be  paid 
to  all  those  who  possessed  the  most  productive  machinery.^ 

^  "  In  agriculture,  too,"  says  Adam  Smith,  "  nature  labours  along  with 
man;  and  though  her  labour  costs  no  expense,  its  produce  has  its  value, 
as  well  as  that  of  the  most  expensive  workman."  The  labour  of  nature  is 
paid,  not  because  she  does  much,  but  because  she  does  little.  In  propor- 
tion as  she  becomes  niggardly  in  her  gifts  she  exacts  a  greater  price  for  her 
work.  Where  she  is  munificently  beneficent  she  always  works  gratis. 
"  The  labouring  cattle  employed  in  agriculture  not  only  occasion,  like  the 
workmen  in  manufactures,  the  reproduction  of  a  value  equal  to  their  own 
consumption,  or  to  the  capital  which  employs  them,  together  with  its 
owner's  profits,  but  of  a  much  greater  value.  Over  and  above  the  capital 
of  the  farmer  and  all  its  profits,  they  regularly  occasion  the  reproduction  of 
the  rent  of  the  landlord.  This  rent  may  be  considered  as  the  produce  of 
those  powers  of  nature,  the  use  of  which  the  landlord  lends  to  the  farmer. 
It  is  greater  or  smaller  according  to  the  supposed  extent  of  those  powers, 
or,  in  other  words,  according  to  the  supposed  natural  or  improved  fertility 
of  the  land.  It  is  the  work  of  nature  which  remains,  after  deducting  or 
compensating  everything  which  can  be  regarded  as  the  work  of  man.     It 


40  Political  Economy 

The  rise  of  rent  is  always  the  effect  of  the  increasing  weal 
of  the  country,  and  of  the  difficulty  of  providing  food  for  its 
augmented  population.  It  is  a  symptom,  but  it  is  never  a 
cause  of  wealth;  for  wealth  often  increases  most  rapidly  while 
rent  is  either  stationary,  or  even  falling.  Rent  increases  most 
rapidly  as  the  disposable  land  decreases  in  its  productive 
powers.  Wealth  increases  most  rapidly  in  those  countries 
where  the  disposable  land  is  most  fertile,  where  importation  is 
least  restricted,  and  where,  through  agricultural  improvements, 
productions  can  be  multiplied  without  any  increase  in  the  pro- 
portional quantity  of  labour,  and  where  consequently  the 
progress  of  rent  is  slow. 

If  the  high  price  of  com  were  the  effect,  and  not  the  cause  of 
rent,  price  would  be  proportionally  influenced  as  rents  were 
high  or  low,  and  rent  would  be  a  component  part  of  price.  But 
that  com  which  is  produced  by  the  greatest  quantity  of  labour 

is  seldom  less  than  a  fourth,  and  frequently  more  than  a  third  of  the  whole 
produce.  No  equal  quantity  of  productive  labour  employed  in  manufac- 
tures can  ever  occasion  so  great  a  reproduction.  In  them  nature  does 
nothing,  man  does  all ;  and  the  reproduction  must  always  be  in  proportion 
to  the  strength  of  the  agents  that  occasion  it.  The  capital  employed  in 
agriculture,  therefore,  not  only  puts  into  motion  a  greater  quantity  of 
productive  labour  than  any  equal  capital  employed  in  manufactures,  but  in 
proportion,  too,  to  the  quantity  of  the  productive  labour  which  it  employs 
it  adds  a  much  greater  value  to  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  the  country,  to  the  real  wealth  and  revenue  of  its  inhabitants.  Of  all 
the  ways  in  which  a  capital  can  be  employed,  it  is  by  far  the  most  advan- 
tageous to  the  society." — Book  II.  chap.  v.  p.  15. 

Does  nature  nothing  for  man  in  manufactures?  Are  the  powers  of  wind 
and  water,  which  move  our  machinery  and  assist  navigation,  nothing? 
The  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  and  the  elasticity  of  steam,  which  enable 
us  to  work  the  most  stupendous  engines — are  they  not  the  gifts  of  nature? 
To  say  nothing  of  the  effects  of  the  matter  of  heat  in  softening  and  meltinj; 
metals,  of  the  decomposition  of  the  atmosphere  in  the  process  of  dyeing 
and  fermentation.  There  is  not  a  manufacture  which  can  be  mentioned 
in  which  nature  does  not  give  her  assistance  to  man,  and  give  it,  too, 
generously  and  gratuitously. 

In  remarking  on  the  passage  which  I  have  copied  from  Adam  Smith, 
Mr.  Buchanan  observes,  '*  I  have  endeavoured  to  show,  in  the  observations 
on  productive  and  unproductive  labour,  contained  in  the  fourth  volume, 
that  agriculture  adds  no  more  to  the  national  stock  than  any  other  sort 
of  industry.  In  dwelling  on  the  reproduction  of  rent  as  so  great  an 
advantage  to  society.  Dr.  Smith  does  not  reflect  that  rent  is  the  effect  of 
high  price,  and  that  what  the  landlord  gains  in  this  way  he  gains  at  the 
expense  of  the  community  at  large.  There  is  no  absolute  eain  to  the 
society  by  the  reproduction  of  rent;  it  is  only  one  class  profiting  at  the 
expense  of  another  class.  The  notion  of  agriculture  yielding  a  produce, 
and  a  rent  in  consequence,  because  nature  concurs  with  human  mdiistry 
in  the  process  of  cultivation,  is  a  mere  fancy.  It  is  not  from  the  produce, 
but  from  the  price  at  which  the  produce  is  sold,  that  the  rent  is  derived; 
and  this  price  is  got  not  because  nature  assists  in  the  production,  but 
because  it  is  the  price  which  suits  the  consumption  to  the  supply. 


m 


On  Rent  41 

is  the  regulator  of  the  price  of  com;  and  rent  does  not  and 
cannot  enter  in  the  least  degree  as  a  component  part  of  its 
price.^  Adam  Smith,  therefore,  cannot  be  correct  in  supposing 
that  the  original  rule  which  regulated  the  exchangeable  value 
of  commodities,  namely,  the  comparative  quantity  of  labour  by 
which  they  were  produced,  can  be  at  all  altered  by  the  appro- 
priation of  land  and  the  payment  of  rent.  Raw  material  enters 
into  the  composition  of  most  commodities,  but  the  value  of  that 
raw  material,  as  well  as  corn,  is  regulated  by  the  productiveness 
of  the  portion  of  capital  last  employed  on  the  land  and  paying 
no  rent;  and  therefore  rent  is  not  a  component  part  of  the  price 
of  commodities. 

We  have  been  hitherto  considering  the  effects  of  the  natural 
progress  of  wealth  and  population  on  rent  in  a  country  in  which 
the  land  is  of  variously  productive  powers,  and  we  have  seen 
that  with  every  portion  of  additional  capital  which  it  becomes 
necessary  to  employ  on  the  land  with  a  less  productive  return 
rent  would  rise.  It  follows  from  the  same  principles  that  any 
circumstances  in  the  society  which  should  make  it  unnecessary 
to  employ  the  same  amount  of  capital  on  the  land,  and  which 
should  therefore  make  the  portion  last  employed  more  pro- 
ductive, would  lower  rent.  Any  great  reduction  in  the  capital 
of  a  country  which  should  materially  diminish  the  funds 
destined  for  the  maintenance  of  labour,  would  naturally  have 
this  effect.  Population  regulates  itself  by  the  funds  which  are 
to  employ  it,  and  therefore  always  increases  or  diminishes  with 
the  increase  or  diminution  of  capital.  Every  reduction  of 
capital  is  therefore  necessarily  followed  by  a  less  effective 
demand  for  corn,  by  a  fall  of  price,  and  by  diminished  cultiva- 
tion. In  the  reverse  order  to  that  in  which  the  accumulation 
of  capital  raises  rent  will  the  diminution  of  it  lower  rent.  Land 
of  a  less  unproductive  quality  will  be  in  succession  relinquished, 
the  exchangeable  value  of  produce  will  fall,  and  land  of  a 
superior  quality  will  be  the  land  last  cultivated,  and  that  which 
will  then  pay  no  rent. 

The  same  effects  may,  however,  be  produced  when  the  wealth 
and  population  of  a  country  are  increased,  if  that  increase  is 
accom.panied  by  such  marked  improvements  in  agriculture  as 
shall  have  the  same  effect  of  diminishing  the  necessity  of  culti- 
vating the  poorer  lands,  or  of  expending  the  same  amount  of 
capital  on  the  cultivation  of  the  more  fertile  portions. 

^  The  clearly  understanding  this  principle  is,  I  am  persuaded,  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  the  science  of  political  economy. 


42  Political  Economy 

If  a  million  of  quarters  of  com  be  necessary  for  the  support 
of  a  given  population,  and  it  be  raised  on  land  of  the  qualities 
of  No.  I,  2,  3;  and  if  an  improvement  be  afterwards  discovered 
by  which  it  can  be  raised  on  No.  i  and  2,  without  employing 
No.  3,  it  is  evident  that  the  immediate  effect  must  be  a  fall  of 
rent;  for  No.  2,  instead  of  No.  3,  will  then  be  cultivated  without 
paying  any  rent;  and  the  rent  of  No.  i,  instead  of  being  the 
difference  between  the  produce  of  No.  3  and  No.  i,  will  be  the 
difference  only  between  No.  2  and  i.  With  the  same  popula- 
tion, and  no  more,  there  can  be  no  demand  for  any  additional 
quantity  of  com;  the  capital  and  labour  employed  on  No.  3 
will  be  devoted  to  the  production  of  other  commodities  desirable 
to  the  community,  and  can  have  no  effect  in  raising  rent,  unless 
the  raw  material  from  which  they  are  made  cannot  be  obtained 
without  employing  capital  less  advantageously  on  the  land,  in 
which  case  No.  3  must  again  be  cultivated. 

It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  fall  in  the  relative  price  of 
raw  produce,  in  consequence  of  the  improvement  in  agriculture, 
or  rather  in  consequence  of  less  labour  being  bestowed  on  its 
production,  would  naturally  lead  to  increased  accumulation; 
for  the  profits  of  stock  would  be  greatly  augmented.  This 
accumulation  would  lead  to  an  increased  demand  for  labour,  to 
higher  wages,  to  an  increased  population,  to  a  further  demand 
for  raw  produce,  and  to  an  increased  cultivation.  It  is  only, 
however,  after  the  increase  in  the  population  that  rent  would 
be  as  high  as  before;  that  is  to  say,  after  No.  3  was  taken  into 
cultivation.  A  considerable  period  would  have  elapsed, 
attended  with  a  positive  diminution  of  rent. 

But  improvements  in  agriculture  are  of  two  kinds:  those 
which  increase  the  productive  powers  of  the  land  and  those 
which  enable  us,  by  improving  our  machinery,  to  obtain  its 
produce  with  less  labour.  They  both  lead  to  a  fall  in  the  price 
of  raw  produce;  they  both  affect  rent,  but  they  do  not  affect 
it  equally.  If  they  did  not  occasion  a  fall  in  the  price  of  raw 
produce  they  would  not  be  improvements;  for  it  is  the  essential 
quality  of  an  improvement  to  diminish  the  quantity  of  labour 
before  required  to  produce  a  commodity;  and  this  diminution 
cannot  take  place  without  a  fall  of  its  price  or  relative  value. 

The  improvements  which  increased  the  productive  powers  of 
the  land  are  such  as  the  more  skilful  rotation  of  crops  or  the 
better  choice  of  manure.  These  improvements  absolutely 
enable  us  to  obtain  the  same  produce  from  a  smaller  quantity 
of  land.     If,  by  the  introduction  of  a  course  of  turnips,  I  can 


On  Rent     '  43 

feed  my  sheep  besides  raising  my  corn,  the  land  on  which  the 
sheep  were  before  fed  becomes  unnecessary,  and  the  same 
quantity  of  raw  produce  is  raised  by  the  employment  of  a  less 
quantity  of  land.  If  I  discover  a  manure  which  will  enable  me 
to  make  a  piece  of  land  produce  20  per  cent,  more  corn,  I  may 
withdraw  at  least  a  portion  of  my  capital  from  the  most  unpro- 
ductive part  of  my  farm.  But,  as  I  before  observed,  it  is  not 
necessary  that  land  should  be  thrown  out  of  cultivation  in  order 
to  reduce  rent:  to  produce  this  effect,  it  is  sufficient  that  suc- 
cessive portions  of  capital  are  employed  on  the  same  land  with 
different  results,  and  that  the  portion  which  gives  the  least 
result  should  be  withdrawn.  If,  by  the  introduction  of  the 
turnip  husbandry,  or  by  the  use  of  a  more  invigorating  manure, 
I  can  obtain  the  same  produce  with  less  capital,  and  without 
disturbing  the  difference  between  the  productive  powers  of  the 
successive  portions  of  capital,  I  shall  lower  rent;  for  a  different 
and  more  productive  portion  will  be  that  which  will  form  the 
standard  from  which  every  other  will  be  reckoned.  If,  for 
example,  the  successive  portions  of  capital  yielded  100,  90,  80, 
70;  whilst  I  employed  these  four  portions,  my  rent  would  be 
60,  or  the  difference  between 

70  and  100  =  30  ^  I    QO 

70  and    90  =  20  I    80 

70  and    80  =  10  >     whilst  the  produce  would  be  340    ■<    ^^ 

and  while  I  employed  these  portions,  the  rent  would  remain 
the  same,  although  the  produce  of  each  should  have  an  equal 
augmentation.  If,  instead  of  100,  90,  80,  70,  the  produce 
should  be  increased  to  125,  115,  105,  95,  the  rent  would  still 
be  60,  or  the  difference  between 


95  and  125  =  30  ^ 

95  ^d  105  ^  \l  I         ^^i^^^  *.h«  P^°^"f  ^"^Jd  ^ 
yj  oxiu  i^o       iu  r  increased  to  440 

60  J 


125 

115 

105 

95 

440 


But  with  such  an  increase  of  produce,  without  an  increase  of 
demand,^  there  could  be  no  motive  for  employing  so  much 

^  I  hope  I  am  not  understood  as  undervaluing  the  importance  of  all  sorts 
of  improvements  in  agriculture  to  landlords — their  immediate  effect  is  to 
lower  rent;  but  as  they  give  a  great  stimulus  to  population,  and  at  the 
same  time  enable  us  to  cultivate  poorer  ands  with  less  labour,  they  are 
ultimately  of  immense  advantage  to  landlords.  A  period,  however,  must 
elapse  during  which  they  are  positively  injurious  to  him. 


1,  ana 


44  Political  Economy 

capital  on  the  land;    one  portion  would  be  withdrawn, 
consequently  the  last  portion  of  capital  would  yield  105  instead 
of  95,  and  rent  would  fall  to  30,  or  the  difference  between  M 

105  and  125  —  20\    whilst    the    produce    will    be    still     C  ^^5 

105  and  115  —  10  I    adequate  to  the  wants  of  the  popula-    J     ^ 

—  I    tion,  for  it  would  be  345  quarters,    i  __£ 

'"'  °'  U45 

the  demand  being  only  for  340  quarters. — But  there  are  im- 
provements which  may  lower  the  relative  value  of  produce 
without  lowering  the  com  rent,  though  they  will  lower  the 
money  rent  of  land.  Such  improvements  do  not  increase  the 
productive  powers  of  the  land,  but  they  enable  us  to  obtain 
its  produce  with  less  labour.  They  are  rather  directed  to  the 
formation  of  the  capital  applied  to  the  land  than  to  the  culti- 
vation of  the  land  itself.  Improvements  in  agricultural  imple- 
ments, such  as  the  plough  and  the  thrashing  machine,  economy 
in  the  use  of  horses  employed  in  husbandry,  and  a  better  know- 
ledge of  the  veterinary  art,  are  of  this  nature.  Less  capital, 
which  is  the  same  thing  as  less  labour,  will  be  employed  on  the 
land;  but  to  obtain  the  same  produce,  less  land  cannot  be 
cultivated.  Whether  improvements  of  this  kind,  however, 
affect  corn  rent,  must  depend  on  the  question  whether  the 
difference  between  the  produce  obtained  by  the  employment  of 
different  portions  of  capital  be  increased,  stationary,  or  dimin- 
ished. If  four  portions  of  capital,  50,  60,  70,  80,  be  employed 
on  the  land,  giving  each  the  same  results,  and  any  improve- 
ment in  the  formation  of  such  capital  should  enable  me  to  with- 
draw 5  from  each,  so  that  they  should  be  45,  55,  65,  and  75, 
no  alteration  would  take  place  in  the  corn  rent;  but  if  the 
improvements  were  such  as  to  enable  me  to  make  the  whole 
saving  on  that  portion  of  capital  which  is  least  productively 
employed,  com  rent  would  immediately  fall,  because  the  differ- 
ence between  the  capital  most  productive  and  the  capital  least 
productive  would  be  diminished;  and  it  is  this  difference  which 
constitutes  rent. 

Without  multiplying  instances,  I  hope  enough  has  been  said 
to  show  that  whatever  diminishes  the  inequality  in  the  produce 
obtained  from  successive  portions  of  capital  employed  on  the 
same  or  on  new  land  tends  to  lower  rent;  and  that  whatever 
increases  that  inequality,  necessarily  produces  an  opposite 
effect,  and  tends  to  raise  it. 

In  speaking  of  the  rent  of  the  landlord,  we  have  rather  con- 


On  Rent  45 

sidered  it  as  the  proportion  of  the  produce,  obtained  with  a  given 
capital  on  any  given  farm,  without  any  reference  to  its  exchange- 
able value ;  but  since  the  same  cause,  the  difficulty  of  production, 
raises  the  exchangeable  value  of  raw  produce,  and  raises  also 
the  proportion  of  raw  produce  paid  to  the  landlord  for  rent,  it  is 
obvious  that  the  landlord  is  doubly  benefited  by  difficulty  of 
production.  First,  he  obtains  a  greater  share,  and,  secondly, 
the  commodity  in  which  he  is  paid  is  of  greater  value.^ 

^  To  make  this  obvious,  and  to  show  the  degrees  in  which  com  and 
money  rent  will  vary,  let  us  suppose  that  the  labour  of  ten  men  will,  on 
land  of  a  certain  quality,  obtain  i8o  quarters  of  wheat,  and  its  value  to  be 
£4  per  quarter,  or  £720;  and  that  the  labour  of  ten  additional  men  will, 
on  the  same  or  any  other  land,  proc'uce  only  170  quarters  in  addition; 
wheat  would  rise  from  £4  to  £4.  4s.  8d.  for  170:  180:  :  £4:  ^4  4s.  Sd.;  or, 
as  in  the  production  of  170  quarters,  the  labour  of  10  men  is  necessary  in 
one  case,  and  only  of  9.44  in  the  other,  the  rise  would  be  as  9.44  to  10,  or 
*s  £4  to  £4  4s.  8d.     If  lo  men  be  further  employed,  and  the  return  be 

160  the  price  will  rise  to  £4  10    o 
150        „  „        4  16    o 

140        „  ,,52  10 

Now,  if  no  rent  was  paid  for  the  land  which  yielded  180  quarters,  when 
corn  was  at  £4  per  quarter,  the  value  of  lo  quarters  would  be  paid  as  rent 
when  only  170  could  be  procured,  which  at  £4  4s.  8d.  would  £42  75.  6d. 

ioquarters  when  160  were  produced,  which  at  £4  10  o  would  be  £90  o  o 
30  quarters     „      150  „  „       4  16     o        „         144     o    o 

40  quarters     „      140  „  ,,52  10        „         205  13    4 

(  100  \  /lOO 

Corn  rent  would  increase  in  J  200  (    and  money  rent  in  the    1  212 

the  proportion  of  j   300  [  proportion  of  1  340 

\  400  ;  U85 


CHAPTER  III 

ON  THE   RENT   OF  MINES 

The  metals,  like  other  things,  are  obtained  by  labour.  Nature, 
indeed,  produces  them;  but  it  is  the  labour  of  man  which 
extracts  them  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth  and  prepares  them 
for  our  service. 

Mines,  as  well  as  land,  generally  pay  a  rent  to  their  owner; 
and  this  rent,  as  well  as  the  rent  of  land,  is  the  effect  and  never 
the  cause  of  the  high  value  of  their  produce.  ^^Hl 

If  there  were  abundance  of  equally  fertile  mines,  which  anyBI 
one  might  appropriate,  they  could  yield  no  rent;   the  value  of 
their  produce  would  depend  on  the  quantity  of  labour  necessary 
to  extract  the  metal  from  the  mine  and  bring  it  to  market. 

But  there  are  mines  of  various  qualities  affording  very  dif- 
ferent results  with  equal  quantities  of  labour.  The  metal 
produced  from  the  poorest  mine  that  is  worked  must  at  least 
have  an  exchangeable  value,  not  only  sufficient  to  procure  all 
the  clothes,  food,  and  other  necessaries  consumed  by  those 
employed  in  working  it,  and  bringing  the  produce  to  market, 
but  also  to  afford  the  common  and  ordinary  profits  to  him  who 
advances  the  stock  necessary  to  carry  on  the  undertaking. 
The  return  for  capital  from  the  poorest  mine  paying  no  rent 
would  regulate  the  rent  of  all  the  other  more  productive  mines. 
This  mine  is  supposed  to  yield  the  usual  profits  of  stock.  All 
that  the  other  mines  produce  more  than  this  will  necessarily 
be  paid  to  the  owners  for  rent.  Since  this  principle  is  precisely 
the  same  as  that  which  we  have  already  laid  down  respecting^ 
land,  it  will  not  be  necessary  further  to  enlarge  on  it.  ^Hj 

It  will  be  sufficient  to  remark  that  the  same  general  rul^"' 
which  regulates  the  value  of  raw  produce  and  manufactured 
commodities  is  applicable  also  to  the  metals;  their  value 
depending  not  on  the  rate  of  profits,  nor  on  the  rate  of  wages,  nor 
on  the  rent  paid  for  mines,  but  on  the  total  quantity  of  labour 
necessary  to  obtain  the  metal  and  to  bring  it  to  market. 

Like  every  other  commodity,  the  value  of  the  metals  is  subject 
to  variation.  Improvements  may  be  made  in  the  implements 
and  machinery  used  in  mining,  which  may  considerably  abridge 
labour;  new  and  more  productive  mines  may  be  discovered, 
in  which,  with  the  same  labour,  more  metal  may  be  obtained; 

46 


On  the  Rent  of  Mines  47 

or  the  facilities  of  bringing  it  to  market  may  be  increased.  In 
either  of  these  cases  the  metals  would  fall  in  value,  and  would 
therefore  exchange  for  a  less  quantity  of  other  things.  On  the 
other  hand,  from  the  increasing  difficulty  of  obtaining  the  metal, 
occasioned  by  the  greater  depth  at  which  the  mine  must  be 
worked,  and  the  accumulation  of  water,  or  any  other  contin- 
gency, its  value  compared  with  that  of  other  things  might  be 
considerably  increased. 

It  has  therefore  been  justly  observed  that  however  honestly 
the  coin  of  a  country  may  conform  to  its  standard,  money  made 
of  gold  and  silver  is  still  liable  to  fluctuations  in  value,  not  only 
to  accidental  and  temporary,  but  to  permanent  and  natural 
variations,  in  the  same  manner  as  other  commodities. 

By  the  discovery  of  America,  and  the  rich  mines  in  which  it 
abounds,  a  very  great  effect  was  produced  on  the  natural  price 
of  the  precious  metals.  This  effect  is  by  msmy  supposed  not 
yet  to  have  terminated.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  all  the 
effects  on  the  value  of  the  metals  resulting  from  the  discovery 
of  America  have  long  ceased;  and  if  any  fall  has  of  late  3'ears 
taken  place  in  their  value,  it  is  to  be  attributed  to  improvements 
in  the  mode  of  working  the  mines. 

From  whatever  cause  it  may  have  proceeded,  the  effect  has 
been  so  slow  and  gradual  that  little  practical  inconvenience 
has  been  felt  from  gold  and  silver  being  the  general  medium  in 
which  the  value  of  all  other  things  is  estimated.  Though 
undoubtedly  a  variable  measure  of  value,  there  is  probably  no 
commodity  subject  to  fewer  variations.  This  and  the  other 
advantages  which  these  metals  possess,  such  as  their  hardness, 
their  malleability,  their  divisibility,  and  many  more,  have 
justly  secured  the  preference  everywhere  given  to  them  as 
a  standard  for  the  money  of  civilised  countries. 

If  equal  quantities  of  labour,  with  equal  quantities  of  fixed 
capital,  could  at  all  times  obtain  from  that  mine  which  paid  no 
rent  equal  quantities  of  gold,  gold  would  be  as  nearly  an 
invariable  measure  of  value  as  we  could  in  the  nature  of  things 
possess.  The  quantity  indeed  would  enlarge  with  the  demand, 
but  its  value  would  be  invariable,  and  it  would  be  eminently 
well  calculated  to  measure  the  varying  value  of  all  other  things. 
I  have  already  in  a  former  part  of  this  work  considered  gold  as 
endowed  with  this  uniformity,  and  in  the  following  chapter 
I  shall  continue  the  supposition.  In  speaking  therefore  of 
varying  price,  the  variation  will  be  always  considered  as  being 
in  the  commodity,  and  never  in  the  medium  in  which  it  is 
estimated. 


CHAPTER  IV 

ON  NATURAL  AND  MARKET  PRICE 

In  making  labour  the  foundation  of  the  value  of  commodities, 
and  the  comparative  quantity  of  labour  which  is  necessary  to 
their  production,  the  rule  which  determines  the  respective 
quantities  of  goods  which  shall  be  given  in  exchange  for  each 
other,  we  must  not  be  supposed  to  deny  the  accidental  and 
temporary  deviations  of  the  actual  or  market  price  of  com- 
modities from  this,  their  primary  and  natural  price. 

In  the  ordinary  course  of  events,  there  is  no  commodity 
which  continues  for  any  length  of  time  to  be  supplied  precisely 
in  that  degree  of  abundance  which  the  wants  and  wishes  of 
mankind  require,  and  therefore  there  is  none  which  is  not  subject 
to  accidental  and  temporary  variations  of  price. 

It  is  only  in  consequence  of  such  variations  that  capital  is 
apportioned  precisely,  in  the  requisite  abundance  and  no  more, 
to  the  production  of  the  different  commodities  which  happen 
to  be  in  demand.  With  the  rise  or  fall  of  price,  profits  are 
elevated  above,  or  depressed  below,  their  general  level;  and 
capital  is  either  encouraged  to  enter  into,  or  is  warned  to  depart 
from,  the  particular  employment  in  which  the  variation  has 
taken  place. 

Whilst  every  man  is  free  to  employ  his  capital  where  he 
pleases,  he  will  naturally  seek  for  it  that  employment  which  is 
most  advantageous;  he  will  naturally  be  dissatisfied  with  a 
profit  of  10  per  cent.,  if  by  removing  his  capital  he  can  obtain 
a  profit  of  15  per  cent.  This  restless  desire  on  the  part  of  all  the 
emplo3'ers  of  stock  to  quit  a  less  profitable  for  a  more  advan- 
tageous business  has  a  strong  tendency  to  equalise  the  rate  of 
profits  of  all,  or  to  fix  them  in  such  proportions  as  may,  in  the 
estimation  of  the  parties,  compensate  for  any  advantage  which 
one  may  have,  or  may  appear  to  have,  over  the  other.  It  is 
perhaps  very  difficult  to  trace  the  steps  by  which  this  change  is 
effected:  it  is  probably  effected  by  a  manufacturer  not  abso- 
lutely changing  his  employment,  but  only  lessening  the  quantity 
of  capital  he  has  in  that  employment.      In  all  rich  countries 

48 


On  Natural  and  Market  Price  49 

tliere  is  a  number  of  men  forming  what  is  called  the  moneyed 
class;  these  men  are  engaged  in  no  trade,  but  live  on  the  interest 
of  their  money,  which  is  employed  in  discounting  bills,  or  in 
loans  to  the  more  industrious  part  of  the  community.  The 
bankers  too  employ  a  large  capital  on  the  same  objects.  The 
capital  so  employed  forms  a  circulating  capital  of  a  large  amount, 
and  is  employed,  in  larger  or  smaller  proportions,  by  all  the 
different  trades  of  a  country.  There  is  perhaps  no  manufacturer, 
however  rich,  who  limits  his  business  to  the  extent  that  his  own 
funds  alone  will  allow:  he  has  always  some  portion  of  this 
floating  capital,  increasing  or  diminishing  according  to  the 
activity  of  the  demand  for  his  commodities.  When  the  demand 
for  silks  increases,  and  that  for  cloth  diminishes,  the  clothier  does 
not  remove  with  his  capital  to  the  silk  trade,  but  he  dismisses 
some  of  his  workmen,  he  discontinues  his  demand  for  the  loan 
from^bankers  and  moneyed  men ;  while  the  case  of  the  silk  manu- 
facturer is  the  reverse:  he  wishes  to  employ  more  workmen, 
and  thus  his  motive  for  borrowing  is  increased;  he  borrows 
more,  and  thus  capital  is  transferred  from  one  employment  to 
another  without  the  necessity  of  a  manufacturer  discontinuing 
his  usual  occupation.  When  we  look  to  the  markets  of  a  large 
town,  and  observe  how  regularly  they  are  supplied  both  with 
home  and  foreign  commodities,  in  the  quantity  in  which  they 
are  required,  under  all  the  circumstances  of  varying  demand, 
arising  from  the  caprice  of  taste,  or  a  change  in  the  amount 
of  population,  without  often  producing  either  the  effects  of 
a  glut  from  a  too  abundant  supply,  or  an  enormously  high  price 
from  the  supply  being  unequal  to  the  demand,  we  must  confess 
that  the  principle  which  apportions  capital  to  each  trade  in  the 
precise  amount  that  it  is  required  is  more  active  than  is  generally 
supposed. 

A  capitalist,  in  seeking  profitable  employment  for  his  funds, 
will  naturally  take  into  consideration  all  the  advantages  which 
one  occupation  possesses  over  another.  He  may  therefore  be 
willing  to  forego  a  part  of  his  money  profit  in  consideration  of 
the  security,  cleanliness,  ease,  or  any  other  real  or  fancied 
advantage  which  one  employment  may  possess  over  another. 

If  from  a  consideration  of  these  circumstances,  the  profits  of 
stock  should  be  so  adjusted  that  in  one  trade  they  were  20,  in 
another  25,  and  in  another  30  per  cent.,  they  would  probably 
continue  permanently  with  that  relative  difference,  and  with 
that  difference  only;  for  if  any  cause  should  elevate  the  profits 
of  one  of  these  trades  10  per  cent.,  either  these  profits  would  be 

D 


50  Political  Economy 


n 


temporary,  and  would  soon  again  fall  back  to  their  usual  station,' 
or  the  profits  of  the  others  would  be  elevated  in  the  same 
proportion. 

The  present  time  appears  to  be  one  of  the  exceptions  to  the 
justness  of  this  remark.  The  termination  of  the  war  has  so 
deranged  the  division  which  before  existed  of  employments  in 
Europe,  that  every  capitalist  has  not  yet  found  his  place  in  the 
new  division  which  has  now  become  necessary. 

Let  us  suppose  that  all  commodities  are  at  their  natural  price, 
and  consequently  that  the  profits  of  capital  in  all  employments 
are  exactly  at  the  same  rate,  or  differ  only  so  much  as,  in  the 
estimation  of  the  parties,  is  equivalent  to  any  real  or  fancied 
advantage  which  they  possess  or  forego.  Suppose  now  that  a 
change  of  fashion  should  increase  the  demand  for  silks  and 
lessen  that  for  woollens;  their  natural  price,  the  quantity  of 
labour  necessary  to  their  production,  would  continue  unaltered, 
but  the  market  price  of  silks  would  rise  and  that  of  woollens 
would  fall;  and  consequently  the  profits  of  the  silk  manufac- 
turer would  be  above,  whilst  those  of  the  woollen  manufacturer 
would  be  below,  the  general  and  adjusted  rate  of  profits.  Not 
only  the  profits,  but  the  wages  of  the  workmen,  would  be  affected 
in  these  employments.  This  increased  demand  for  silks  would, 
however,  soon  be  supplied  by  the  transference  of  capital  and 
labour  from  the  woollen  to  the  silk  manufacture;  when  the 
market  prices  of  silks  and  woollens  would  again  approach  their^. 
natural  prices,  and  then  the  usual  profits  would  be  obtained  bjlH 
the  respective  manufacturers  of  those  commodities.  ^"j 

It  is  then  the  desire,  which  every  capitalist  has,  of  diverting 
his  funds  from  a  less  to  a  more  profitable  employment  that 
prevents  the  market  price  of  commodities  from  continuing  for 
any  length  of  time  either  much  above  or  much  below  their 
natural  price.  It  is  this  competition  which  so  adjusts  the 
changeable  value  of  commodities  that,  after  paying  the  wages 
for  the  labour  necessary  to  their  production,  and  all  other 
expenses  required  to  put  the  capital  employed  in  its  original 
state  of  efficiency,  the  remaining  value  or  overplus  will  in  each 
trade  be  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  capital  employed. 

In  the  seventh  chapter  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  all  that  con- 
cerns this  question  is  most  ably  treated.  Having  fully  acknow- 
ledged the  temporary  effects  which,  in  particular  employments 
of  capital,  may  be  produced  on  the  prices  of  commodities,  as 
well  as  on  the  wages  of  labour,  and  the  profits  of  stock,  by 
accidental  causes,  without  influencing  the  general  price  of  com- 


On  Natural  and  Market  Price  51 

modities^  wages,  or  profits,  since  these  effects  are  equally  opera- 
tive in  all  stages  of  society,  we  will  leave  them  entirely  out  of 
our  consideration  whilst  we  are  treating  of  the  laws  which 
regulate  natural  prices,  natural  wages,  and  natural  profits, 
effects  totally  independent  of  these  accidental  causes.  In 
speaking,  then,  of  the  exchangeable  value  of  commodities,  or 
the  power  of  purchasing  possessed  by  any  one  commodity,  I 
mean  always  that  power  which  it  would  possess  if  not  disturbed 
by  any  temporary  or  accidental  cause,  and  which  is  its  natural 
price. 


CHAPTER  V 

ON  WAGES 

.ABOUR,  like  all  other  things  which  are  purchased  and  sold,  and 
which  may  be  increased  or  diminished  in  quantity,  has  its 
natural  and  its  market  price.  The  natural  price  of  labour  is 
that  price  which  is  necessary  to  enable  the  labourers,  one  with 
another,  to  subsist  and  to  perpetuate  their  race,  without  either 
increase  or  diminution. 

The  power  of  the  labourer  to  support  himself,  and  the  family 
which  may  be  necessary  to  keep  up  the  number  of  labourers, 
does  not  depend  on  the  quantity  of  money  which  he  may 
receive  for  waiges,  but  on  the  quantity  of  food,  necessaries,  and 
conveniences  become  essential  to  him  from  habit  which  that 
money  will  purchase.  The  natural  price  of  labour,  therefore, 
depends  on  the  price  of  the  food,  necessaries,  and  conveniences 
required  for  the  support  of  the  labourer  and  his  family.  With 
a  rise  in  the  price  of  food  and  necessaries,  the  natural  price  of 
labour  will  rise;  with  the  fall  in  their  price,  the  natural  price  of 
labour  will  fall. 

With  the  progress  of  society  the  natural  price  of  labour  has 
always  a  tendency  to  rise,  because  one  of  the  principal  com- 
modities by  which  its  natural  price  is  regulated  has  a  tendency 
to  become  dearer  from  the  greater  difficulty  of  producing  it. 
As,  however,  the  improvements  in  agriculture,  the  discovery  of 
new  markets,  whence  provisions  may  be  imported,  may  for  a 
time  counteract  the  tendency  to  a  rise  in  the  price  of  necessaries, 
and  may  even  occasion  their  natural  price  to  fall,  so  will  the 
same  causes  produce  the  correspondent  effects  on  the  natural 
price  of  labour. 

The  natural  price  of  all  commodities,  excepting  raw  produce 
and  labour,  has  a  tendency  to  fall  in  the  progress  of  wealth  and 
population;  for  though,  on  one  hand,  they  are  enhanced  in 
real  value,  from  the  rise  in  the  natural  price  of  the  raw  material 
of  which  they  are  made,  this  is  more  than  counterbalanced  by 
the  improvements  in  machinery,  by  the  better  division  and 
distribution  of  labour,  and  by  the  increasing  skill,  both  in  science 
and  art,  of  the  producers. 

^2 


On  Wages  53 

The  market  price  of  labour  is  the  price  which  is  really  paid 
for  it,  from  the  natural  operation  of  the  proportion  of  the  supply 
to  the  demand;  labour  is  dear  when  it  is  scarce  and  cheap  when 
it  is  plentiful.  However  much  the  market  price  of  labour  may 
deviate  from  its  natural  price,  it  has,  like  commodities,  a 
tendency  to  conform  to  it. 

It  is  when  the  market  price  of  labour  exceeds  its  natural  price 
that  the  condition  of  the  labourer  is  flourishing  and  happy,  that 
he  has  it  in  his  power  to  command  a  greater  proportion  of  the 
necessaries  and  enjoyments  of  life,  and  therefore  to  rear  a 
healthy  and  numerous  family.  When,  however,  by  the  en- 
couragement which  high  wages  give  to  the  increase  of  popula- 
tion, the  number  of  labourers  is  increased,  wages  again  fall  to 
their  natural  price,  and  indeed  from  a  reaction  sometimes  fall 
below  it. 

When  the  market  price  of  labour  is  below  its  natural  price, 
the  condition  of  the  labourers  is  most  wretched:  then  poverty 
deprives  them  of  those  comforts  which  custom  renders  absolute 
necessaries.  It  is  only  after  their  privations  have  reduced  their 
number,  or  the  demand  for  labour  has  increased,  that  the 
market  price  of  labour  will  rise  to  its  natural  price,  and  that 
the  labourer  will  have  the  moderate  comforts  which  the  natural 
rate  of  wages  will  afford. 

Notwithstanding  the  tendency  of  wages  to  conform  to  their 
natural  rate,  their  market  rate  may,  in  an  improving  society, 
for  an  indefinite  period,  be  constantly  above  it;  for  no  sooner 
may  the  impulse  which  an  increased  capital  gives  to  a  new 
.demand  for  labour  be  obeyed,  than  another  increase  of  capital 
may  produce  the  same  effect;  and  thus,  if  the  increase  of  capital 
be  gradual  and  constant,  the  demand  for  labour  may  give  a 
continued  stimulus  to  an  increase  of  people. 

Capital  is  that  part  of  the  wealth  of  a  country  which  is  em- 
ployed in  production,  and  consists  of  food,  clothing,  tools,  raw 
materials,  machinery,  etc.,  necessary  to  give  effect  to  labour. 

Capital  may  increase  in  quantity  at  the  same  time  that  its 
value  rises.  An  addition  may  be  made  to  the  food  and  clothing 
of  a  country  at  the  same  time  that  more  labour  may  be  required 
to  produce  the  additional  quantity  than  before;  in  that  case  not 
only  the  quantity  but  the  value  of  capital  will  rise. 

Or  capital  may  increase  without  its  value  increasing,  and  even 
while  its  value  is  actually  diminishing;  not  only  may  an  addi- 
tion be  made  to  the  food  and  clothing  of  a  country,  but  the 
addition  may  be  made  by  the  aid  of  machinery,  without  any 


54  Political  Economy 

increase,  and  even  with  an  absolute  diminution  in  the  propor- 
tional quantity  of  labour  required  to  produce  them.  The 
quantity  of  capital  may  increase,  while  neither  the  whole 
together,  nor  any  part  of  it  singly,  will  have  a  greater  value 
than  before,  but  may  actually  have  a  less. 

In  the  first  case,  the  natural  price  of  labour,  which  always 
depends  on  the  price  of  food,  clothing,  and  other  necessaries, 
will  rise;  in  the  second,  it  will  remain  stationary  or  fall;  but 
in  both  cases  the  market  rate  of  wages  will  rise,  for  in  propor- 
tion to  the  increase  of  capital  will  be  the  increase  in  the  demand 
for  labour;  in  proportion  to  the  work  to  be  done  will  be  the 
demand  for  those  who  are  to  do  it. 

In  both  cases,  too,  the  market  price  of  labour  will  rise  above 
its  natural  price;  and  in  both  cases  it  will  have  a  tendency  to 
conform  to  its  natural  price,  but  in  the  first  case  this  agreement 
will  be  most  speedily  effected.  The  situation  of  the  labourer 
will  be  improved,  but  not  much  improved;  for  the  increased 
price  of  food  and  necessaries  will  absorb  a  large  portion  of  his 
increased  wages;  consequently  a  small  supply  of  labour,  or  a 
trifling  increase  in  the  population,  will  soon  reduce  the  market 
price  to  the  then  increased  natural  price  of  labour. 

In  the  second  case,  the  condition  of  the  labourer  will  be  very 
greatly  improved;  he  will  receive  increased  money  wages 
without  having  to  pay  any  increased  price,  and  perhaps  even 
a  diminished  price  for  the  commodities  which  he  and  his  family 
consume;  and  it  will  not  be  till  after  a  great  addition  has  been 
made  to  the  population  that  the  market  price  of  labour  will 
again  sink  to  its  then  low  and  reduced  natural  price. 

Thus,  then,  with  every  improvement  of  society,  with  every 
increase  in  its  capital,  the  market  wages  of  labour  will  rise; 
but  the  permanence  of  their  rise  will  depend  on  the  question 
whether  the  natural  price  of  labour  has  also  risen;  and  this 
again  will  depend  on  the  rise  in  the  natural  price  of  those  neces<jHI 
saries  on  which  the  wages  of  labour  are  expended.  ^"I 

It  is  not  to  be  understood  that  the  natural  price  of  labour, 
estimated  even  in  food  and  necessaries,  is  absolutely  fixed  and 
constant.  It  varies  at  different  times  in  the  same  country,  and 
very  materially  differs  in  different  countries.^     It  essentially 

*  "  The  shelter  and  the  clothing  which  are  indispensable  in  one  country 
may  be  no  way  necessary  in  another;  and  a  labourer  in  Hindostan  may 
continue  to  work  with  perfect  vigour,  though  receiving,  as  his  natural 
wages,  only  such  a  supply  of  covering  as  would  be  insufficient  to  preserve 
a  labourer  in  Russia  from  perishing.  Even  in  countries  situated  in  the 
same  climate,  different  habits  of  living,  will  often  occasion  variations  in  the 


On  Wages  55 

depends  on  the  habits  and  customs  of  the  people.  An  EngHsh 
labourer  would  consider  his  wages  under  their  natural  rate,  and 
too  scanty  to  support  a  family,  if  they  enabled  him  to  purchase 
no  other  food  than  potatoes,  and  to  live  in  no  better  habitation 
than  a  mud  cabin;  yet  these  moderate  demands  of  nature  are 
often  deemed  sufficient  in  countries  where  "  man's  life  is  cheap  " 
and  his  wants  easily  satisfied.  Many  of  the  conveniences  now 
enjoyed  in  an  English  cottage  would  have  been  thought  luxuries 
at  an  earlier  period  of  our  history. 

From  manufactured  commodities  always  falling  and  raw 
produce  always  rising,  with  the  progress  of  society,  such  a  dis- 
proportion in  their  relative  value  is  at  length  created,  that  in 
rich  countries  a  labourer,  by  the  sacrifice  of  a  very  small  quan- 
tity only  of  his  food,  is  able  to  provide  liberally  for  all  his  other 
wants. 

Independently  of  the  variations  in  the  value  of  money,  which 
necessarily  affect  money  wages,  but  which  we  have  here  supposed 
to  have  no  operation,  as  we  have  considered  money  to  be  uni- 
formly of  the  same  value,  it  appears  then  that  wages  are  subject 
to  a  rise  or  fall  from  two  causes : — 

First,  the  supply  and  demand  of  labourers. 

Secondly,  the  price  of  the  commodities  on  which  the  wages 
of  labour  are  expended. 

In  different  stages  of  society,  the  accumulation  of  capital,  or 
of  the  means  of  employing  labour,  is  more  or  less  rapid,  and 
must  in  all  cases  depend  on  the  productive  powers  of  labour. 
The  productive  powers  of  labour  are  generally  greatest  when 
there  is  an  abundance  of  fertile  land:  at  such  periods  accumu- 
lation is  often  so  rapid  that  labourers  cannot  be  supplied  with 
the  same  rapidity  as  capital. 

It  has  been  calculated  that  under  favourable  circumstances 
population  may  be  doubled  in  twenty-five  years;  but  under  the 
same  favourable  circumstances  the  whole  capital  of  a  country 
might  possibly  be  doubled  in  a  shorter  period.  In  that  case, 
wages  during  the  whole  period  would  have  a  tendency  to  rise, 
because  the  demand  for  labour  would  increase  still  faster  than 
the  supply. 

In  new  settlements,  where  the  arts  and  knowledge  of  countries 
far  advanced  in  refinement  are  introduced,  it  is  probable  that 
capital  has  a  tendency  to  increase  faster  than  mankind;    and 

natural  price  of  labour  as  considerable  as  those  which  are  produced  by 
natural  causes." — P.  68.  An  Essay  on  the  External  Corn  Trade,  by 
R.  Torrens,  Esq. 

The  whole  of  this  subject  is  inost  ably  illustrated  by  Colonel  Torrens. 


■ 

urous      ■ 


56  Political  Economy 

if  the  deficiency  of  labourers  were  not  supplied  by  more  populous 
countries,  this  tendency  would  very  much  raise  the  price  of 
labour.  In  proportion  as  these  countries  become  populous,  and 
land  of  a  worse  quality  is  taken  into  cultivation,  the  tendency 
to  an  increase  of  capital  diminishes;  for  the  surplus  produce 
remaining,  after  satisfying  the  wants  of  the  existing  population, 
must  necessarily  be  in  proportion  to  the  facility  of  production, 
viz.  to  the  smaller  number  of  persons  employed  in  production. 
Although,  then,  it  is  probable  that,  under  the  most  favourable 
circumstances,  the  power  of  production  is  still  greater  than  that 
of  population,  it  will  not  long  continue  so;  for  the  land  being 
limited  in  quantity,  and  differing  in  quality,  with  every  increased 
portion  of  capital  employed  on  it  there  will  be  a  decreased  rate 
of  production,  whilst  the  power  of  population  continues  always 
the  same. 

In  those  countries  where  there  is  abundance  of  fertile  land, 
but  where,  from  the  ignorance,  indolence,  and  barbarism  of  the 
inhabitants,  they  are  exposed  to  all  the  evils  of  want  and  famine, 
and  where  it  has  been  said  that  population  presses  against  the 
means  of  subsistence,  a  very  different  remedy  should  be  applied 
from  that  which  is  necessary  in  long  settled  countries,  where, 
from  the  diminishing  rate  of  the  supply  of  raw  produce,  all  the 
evils  of  a  crowded  population  are  experienced.  In  the  one  case, 
the  evil  proceeds  from  bad  government,  from  the  insecurity  of 
property,  and  from  a  want  of  education  in  all  ranks  of  the  people. 
To  be  made  happier  they  require  only  to  be  better  governed 
and  instructed,  as  the  augmentation  of  capital,  beyond  the 
augmentation  of  people,  would  be  the  inevitable  result.  No 
increase  in  the  population  can  be  too  great,  as  the  powers  of 
production  are  still  greater.  In  the  other  case,  the  population 
increases  faster  than  the  funds  required  for  its  support.  Every 
exertion  of  industry,  unless  accompanied  by  a  diminished  rate 
of  increase  in  the  population,  will  add  to  the  evil,  for  production 
cannot  keep  pace  with  it. 

With  a  population  pressing  against  the  means  of  subsistence, 
the  only  remedies  are  either  a  reduction  of  people  or  a  more 
rapid  accumulation  a  capital.  In  rich  countries,  where  all  the 
fertile  land  is  already  cultivated,  the  latter  remedy  is  neither 
very  practicable  nor  very  desirable,  because  its  effort  would  be, 
if  pushed  very  far,  to  render  all  classes  equally  poor.  But  in 
poor  countries,  where  there  are  abundant  means  of  production 
in  store,  from  fertile  land  not  yet  brought  into  cultivation,  it  is 
the  only  safe  and  efficacious   means    of   removing    the   evil. 


On  Wages  57 

particular!)^  as  its  effect  would  be  to  elevate  all  classes  of  the 
people. 

The  friends  of  humanity  cannot  but  wish  that  in  all  countries 
the  labouring  classes  should  have  a  taste  for  comforts  and 
enjoyments,  and  that  they  should  be  stimulated  by  all  legal 
means  in  their  exertions  to  procure  them.  There  cannot  be  a 
better  security  against  a  superabundant  population.  In  those 
countries  where  the  labouring  classes  have  the  fewest  wants, 
and  are  contented  with  the  cheapest  food,  the  people  are  exposed 
to  the  greatest  vicissitudes  and  miseries.  They  have  no  place 
of  refuge  from  calamity;  they  cannot  seek  safety  in  a  lower 
station;  they  are  already  so  low  that  they  can  fall  no  lower. 
On  any  deficiency  of  the  chief  article  of  their  subsistence  there 
are  few  substitutes  of  which  they  can  avail  themselves  and 
dearth  to  them  is  attended  with  almost  all  the  evils  of 
famine. 

In  the  natural  advance  of  society,  the  wages  of  labour  will 
have  a  tendency  to  fall,  as  far  as  they  are  regulated  by  supply 
and  demand;  for  the  supply  of  labourers  will  continue  to 
increase  at  the  same  rate,  whilst  the  demand  for  them  will 
increase  at  a  slower  rate.  If,  for  instance,  wages  were  regulated 
by  a  yearly  increase  of  capital  at  the  rate  of  2  per  cent.,  they 
would  fall  when  it  accumulated  only  at  the  rate  of  i^  per  cent. 
They  would  fall  still  lower  when  it  increased  only  at  the  rate 
of  I  or  ^  per  cent.^  and  would  continue  to  do  so  until  the  capital 
became  stationary,  when  wages  also  would  become  stationary, 
and  be  only  sufficient  to  keep  up  the  numbers  of  the  actual 
population.  I  say  that,  under  these  circumstances,  wages 
would  fall  if  they  were  regulated  only  by  the  supply  and  demand 
of  labourers;  but  we  must  not  forget  that  wages  are  also 
regulated  by  the  prices  of  the  commodities  on  which  they  are 
expended. 

As  population  increases,  these  necessaries  will  be  constantly 
rising  in  price,  because  more  labour  will  be  necessary  to  produce 
them.  If,  then,  the  money  wages  of  labour  should  fall,  whilst 
every  commodity  on  which  the  wages  of  labour  were  expended 
rose,  the  labourer  would  be  doubly  affected,  and  would  be  soon 
totally  deprived  of  subsistence.  Instead,  therefore,  of  the 
money  wages  of  labour  falling,  they  would  rise;  but  they  would 
not  rise  sufficiently  to  enable  the  labourer  to  purchase  as  many 
comforts  and  necessaries  as  he  did  before  the  rise  in  the  price 
of  those  commodities.  If  his  annual  wages  were  before  £24,  or 
six  quarters  of  corn  when  the  price  was  £4  per  quarter,  he  would 


58  Political  Economy 


1 


probably  receive  only  the  value  of  five  quarters  when  com  rose 
to  £5  per  quarter.  But  five  quarters  would  cost  £25 ;  he  would^ 
therefore,  receive  an  addition  in  his  money  wages,  though  with 
that  addition  he  would  be  unable  to  furnish  himself  with  the 
same  quantity  of  com  and  other  commodities  which  he  had 
before  consumed  in  his  family. 

Notwithstanding,  then,  that  the  labourer  would  be  really 
worse  paid,  yet  this  increase  in  his  wages  would  necessarily 
diminish  the  profits  of  the  manufacturer;  for  his  goods  would 
sell  at  no  higher  price,  and  yet  the  expense  of  producing  them 
would  be  increased.  This,  however,  will  be  considered  in  our 
examination  into  the  principles  which  regulate  profits. 

It  appears,  then,  that  the  same  cause  which  raises  rent, 
namely,  the  increasing  difficulty  of  providing  an  additional 
quantity  of  food  with  the  same  proportional  quantity  of  labour, 
will  also  raise  wages ;  and  therefore,  if  money  be  of  an  unvarying 
value,  both  rent  and  wages  will  have  a  tendency  to  rise  with  the 
progress  of  wealth  and  population. 

But  there  is  this  essential  difference  between  the  rise  of  rent 
and  the  rise  of  wages.  The  rise  in  the  money  value  of  rent  is 
accompanied  by  an  increased  share  of  the  produce;  not  only 
is  the  landlord's  money  rent  greater,  but  his  corn  rent  also;  he 
will  have  more  com,  and  each  defined  measure  of  that  corn  will 
exchange  for  a  greater  quantity  of  all  other  goods  which  have 
not  been  raised  in  value.  The  fate  of  the  labourer  will  be  less 
happy;  he  will  receive  more  money  wages,  it  is  true,  but  his 
corn  wages  will  be  reduced ;  and  not  only  his  command  of  com, 
but  his  general  condition  will  be  deteriorated,  by  his  finding  it 
more  difficult  to  maintain  the  market  rate  of  wages  above  their 
natural  rate.  While  the  price  of  corn  rises  10  per  cent.,  wages 
will  always  rise  less  than  10  per  cent.,  but  rent  will  always  rise 
more;  the  condition  of  the  labourer  will  generally  decline,  and 
that  of  the  landlord  will  always  be  improved. 

When  wheat  was  at  £4  per  quarter,  suppose  the  labourer's 
wages  to  be  £24  per  annum,  or  the  value  of  six  quarters  of  wheat, 
and  suppose  half  his  wages  to  be  expended  on  wheat,  and  the 
other  half,  or  £12,  on  other  things.     He  would  receive 


£24 14s.     > 

(£4  4S.  8d.     ) 

5.83  quarters. 

£25  los.        \ 

when  wheat 

.  £4  los.          1 

or  the 

5.66  quarters. 

£26  8s.          1 

was  at 

£4 165.      1 

value  of 

5.50  quarters. 

£27  8s.  6d.  } 

1^5  2S.  lod.  J 

1 

^5.33  quarters. 

He  would  receive  these  wages  to  enable  him  to  live  just  as 
well,  and  no  better,  than  before;    for  when  corn  was  at  £4 


On  Wages  59 

per  quarter,  he  would  expend  for  three  quarters  of  com,  at 

£4  per  quarter £12 

and  on  other  things £12 

£24 

When  wheat  was  £4  4s.  Sd.,  three  quarters,  which  he  and  his 
family  consumed,  would  cost  him 
other  things  not  altered  in  price 


When  at  £4  105.,  three  quarters  of  wheat  would  cost 
and  other  things 


When  at  £4  165.,  three  quarters  of  wheat 
other  things 


When    at    £5    25.     lod.,    three    quarters    of 
cost       ....... 

other  things 

£27  85.  6d. 

In  proportion  as  com  became  dear,  he  would  receive  less  torn 
wages,  but  his  money  wages  would  always  increase,  whilst  his 
enjoyments,  on  the  above  supposition,  would  be  precisely  the 
same.  But  as  other  commodities  would  be  raised  in  price  in 
proportion  as  raw  produce  entered  into  their  composition,  he 
would  have  more  to  pay  for  some  of  them.  Although  his  tea, 
sugar,  soap,  candles,  and  house  rent  would  probably  be  no 
dearer,  he  would  pay  more  for  his  bacon,  cheese,  butter,  linen, 
shoes,  and  cloth;  and  therefore,  even  with  the  above  increase 
of  wages,  his  situation  would  be  comparatively  worse.  But  it 
may  be  said  that  I  have  been  considering  the  effect  of  wages  on 
price  on  the  supposition  that  gold,  or  the  metal  from  which 
money  is  made,  is  the  produce  of  the  country  in  which  wages 
varied;  and  that  the  consequences  which  I  have  deduced  agree 
little  with  the  actual  state  of  things,  because  gold  is  a  metal 


£12 
£12 

14^. 

£^4 

145. 

£13 

£12 

10^. 

t-5 

105. 

£14 

£" 

Ss. 

£26 

Ss. 

wheat  would 
£15  Ss.  6d. 
£12 

n 


60  Political  Economy 

of  foreign  production.  The  circumstance,  however,  of  gold 
being  a  foreign  production  will  not  invalidate  the  truth  of  the 
argument,  because  it  may  be  shown  that  whether  it  were 
found  at  home,  or  were  imported  from  abroad,  the  effects 
ultimately,  and,  indeed,  immediately,  would  be  the  same. 

When  wages  rise  it  is  generally  because  the  increase  of  wealth 
and  capital  have  occasioned  a  new  demand  for  labour,  which  will 
infallibly  be  attended  with  an  increased  production  of  commo- 
dities. To  circulate  these  additional  commodities,  even  at  the 
same  prices  as  before,  more  money  is  required,  more  of  this 
foreign  commodity  from  which  money  is  made,  and  which  can 
only  be  obtained  by  importation.  Whenever  a  commodity  is 
required  in  greater  abundance  than  before,  its  relative  value 
rises  comparatively  with  those  commodities  with  which  its 
purchase  is  made.  If  more  hats  were  wanted,  their  price  would 
rise,  and  more  gold  would  be  given  for  them.  If  more  gold 
were  required,  gold  would  rise,  and  hats  would  fall  in  price,  as 
a  greater  quantity  of  hats  and  of  all  other  things  would  then 
be  necessary  to  purchase  the  same  quantity  of  gold.  But  in 
the  case  supposed,  to  say  that  commodities  will  rise  because 
wages  rise,  is  to  affirm  a  positive  contradiction;  for  we,  first, 
say  that  gold  will  rise  in  relative  value  in  consequence  of  demand, 
and,  secondly,  that  it  will  fall  in  relative  value  because  prices 
will  rise,  two  effects  which  are  totally  incompatible  with  each 
other.  To  say  that  commodities  are  raised  in  price  is  the  same 
thing  as  to  say  that  money  is  lowered  in  relative  value;  for  it  is 
by  commodities  that  the  relative  value  of  gold  is  estimated. 
If,  then,  all  commodities  rose  in  price,  gold  could  not  come  from 
abroad  to  purchase  those  dear  commodities,  but  it  would  go 
from  home  to  be  employed  with  advantage  in  purchasing  the 
comparatively  cheaper  foreign  commodities.  It  appears,  then, 
that  the  rise  of  wages  will  not  raise  the  prices  of  commodities, 
whether  the  metal  from  which  money  is  made  be  produced  at 
home  or  in  a  foreign  country.  All  commodities  cannot  rise 
at  the  same  time  without  an  addition  to  the  quantity  of  money. 
This  addition  could  not  be  obtained  at  home,  as  we  have  already 
shown;  nor  could  it  be  imported  from  abroad.  To  purchase 
any  additional  quantity  of  gold  from  abroad,  commodities  at 
home  must  be  cheap,  not  dear.  The  importation  of  gold,  and 
a  rise  in  the  price  of  all  home-made  commodities  with  which  gold 
is  purchased  or  paid  for,  are  effects  absolutely  incompatible. 
The  extensive  use  of  paper  money  does  not  alter  this  question, 
for  paper  money  conforms,  or  ought  to  conform,  to  the  value 


On  Wages  61 

of  gold,  and  therefore  its  value  \s  influenced  b)^  such  causes  only 
OS  influence  the  value  of  that  metal. 

These,  then,  are  the  laws  by  which  wages  are  regulated,  and 
by  which  the  happiness  of  far  the  greatest  part  of  every  com- 
munity is  governed.  Like  all  other  contracts,  wages  should 
be  left  to  the  fair  and  free  competition  of  the  market,  and  should 
never  be  controlled  by  the  interference  of  the  legislature. 

The  clear  and  direct  tendency  of  the  poor  laws  is  in  direct 
opposition  to  these  obvious  principles:  it  is  not,  as  the  legislature 
benevolently  intended,  to  amend  the  condition  of  the  poor,  but 
to  deteriorate  the  condition  of  both  poor  and  rich;  instead  of 
making  the  poor  rich,  they  are  calculated  to  make  the  rich  poor; 
and  whilst  the  present  laws  are  in  force,  it  is  quite  in  the  natural 
order  of  things  that  the  fund  for  the  maintenance  of  the  poor 
should  progressively  increase  till  it  has  absorbed  all  the  net 
revenue  of  the  country,  or  at  least  so  much  of  it  as  the  state 
shall  leave  to  us,  after  satisfying  its  own  never-failing  demands 
for  the  public  expenditure.^ 

This  pernicious  tendency  of  these  laws  is  no  longer  a  mystery, 
since  it  has  been  fully  developed  by  the  able  hand  of  Mr.  Malthus ; 
and  every  friend  to  the  poor  must  ardently  wish  for  their 
abolition.  Unfortunately,  however,  they  have  been  so  long 
established,  and  the  habits  of  the  poor  have  been  so  formed 
upon  their  operation,  that  to  eradicate  them  with  safety  from 
our  political  system  requires  the  most  cautious  and  skilful 
management,  it  is  agreed  by  all  who  are  most  friendly  to  a 
repeal  of  these  laws  that,  if  it  be  desirable  to  prevent  the  most 
overwhelming  distress  to  those  for  whose  benefit  they  were 
erroneously  enacted,  their  abolition  should  be  effected  by  the 
most  gradual  steps. 

It  is  a  truth  which  admits  not  a  doubt  that  the  comforts  and 

well-being  of  the  poor  cannot  be  permanently  secured  without 

some  regard  on  their  part,  or  some  effort  on  the  part  of  the 

legislature,  to  regulate  the  increase  of  their  numbers,  and  to 

render   less   frequent   among    them    early    and    improvident 

marriages.    The  operation  of  the  system  of  poor  laws  has  been 

directly  contrary  to  this.    They  have  rendered  restraint  super- 

1  With  Mr.  Buchanan,  in  the  following  passage,  if  it  refers  to  temporary 
states  of  misery,  I  so  far  agree,  that  "  the  great  evil  of  the  labourer's  con- 
dition is  poverty,  arising  either  from  a  scarcity  of  food  or  of  work;  and 
in  all  countries  laws  without  number  have  been  enacted  for  his  relief. 
But  there  are  miseries  in  the  social  state  which  legislation  cannot  relieve; 
and  it  is  useful  therefore  to  know  its  limits,  that  we  may  not,  by  aiming  at 
what  is  impracticable,  miss  the  good  which  is  really  in  our  power." — 
Buchanan,  p.  6i, 


62  Political  Economy 

fluous,  and  have  invited  imprudence,  by  offering  it  a  portion  of 
the  wages  of  prudence  and  industry.^ 

The  nature  of  the  evil  points  out  the  remedy.  By  gradually 
contracting  the  sphere  of  the  poor  laws;  by  impressing  on  the 
poor  the  value  of  independence,  by  teaching  them  that  they 
must  look  not  to  systematic  or  casual  charity,  but  to  their  own 
exertions  for  support,  that  prudence  and  forethought  are 
neither  unnecessary  nor  unprofitable  virtues,  we  shall  by  degrees 
approach  a  sounder  and  more  healthful  state. 

No  scheme  for  the  amendment  of  the  poor  laws  merits  the 
least  attention  which  has  not  their  abolition  for  its  ultimate 
object;  and  he  is  the  best  friend  of  the  poor,  and  to  the  cause 
of  humanity,  who  can  point  out  how  this  end  can  be  attained 
with  the  most  security,  and  at  the  same  time  with  the  least 
violence.  It  is  not  by  raising  in  any  manner  different  from  the 
present  the  fund  from  which  the  poor  are  supported  that  the 
evil  can  be  mitigated.  It  would  not  only  be  no  improvement, 
but  it  would  be  an  aggravation  of  the  distress  which  we  wish 
to  see  removed,  if  the  fund  were  increased  in  amount  or  were 
levied  according  to  some  late  proposals,  as  a  general  fund  from 
the  country  at  large.  The  present  mode  of  its  collection  and 
application  has  served  to  mitigate  its  pernicious  effects.  Each 
parish  raises  a  separate  fund  for  the  support  of  its  own  poor. 
Hence  it  becomes  an  object  of  more  interest  and  more  practica- 
bility to  keep  the  rates  low  than  if  one  general  fund  were  raised 
for  the  relief  of  the  poor  of  the  whole  kingdom.  A  parish  is 
much  more  interested  in  an  economical  collection  of  the  rate, 
and  a  sparing  distribution  of  relief,  when  the  whole  saving  will 
be  for  its  own  benefit,  than  if  hundreds  of  other  parishes  were 
to  partake  of  it.  j 

It  is  to  this  cause  that  we  must  ascribe  the  fact  of  the  poor 
laws  not  having  yet  absorbed  all  the  net  revenue  of  the  country; 
it  is  to  the  rigour  with  which  they  are  applied  that  we  are 
indebted  for  their  not  having  become  overwhelmingly  oppres- 

*  The  progress  of  knowledge  manifested  upon  this  subject  in  the  House 
of  Commons  since  1796  has  happily  not  been  very  small,  as  may  be  seen 
by  contrasting  the  late  report  of  the  committee  on  the  poor  laws  and  the 
following  sentiments  of  Mr.  Pitt  in  that  year:  "  Let  us,"  said  he,  "  make 
relief  in  cases  where  there  are  a  number  of  children  a  matter  of  right  and 
honour,  instead  of  a  ground  of  opprobrium  and  contempt.  This  will  make 
a  large  family  a  blessing  and  not  a  curse ;  and  this  will  draw  a  proper  line 
of  distinction  between  those  who  are  able  to  provide  for  themselves  by 
their  labour,  and  those  who,  after  having  enriched  their  country  with  a 
number  of  children,  have  a  claim  upon  its  assistance  for  support." — 
Hansard's  Parliamentary  History,  vol.  xxxii.  p.  710. 


On  Wages  63 

sive.  If  by  law  every  human  being  wanting  support  could  be 
sure  to  obtain  it,  and  obtain  it  in  such  a  degree  as  to  make  life 
tolerably  comfortable,  theory  would  lead  us  to  expect  that  all 
other  taxes  together  would  be  light  compared  with  the  single 
one  of  poor  rates.  The  principle  of  gravitation  is  not  more 
certain  than  the  tendency  of  such  laws  to  change  wealth  and 
power  into  misery  and  weakness;  to  call  away  the  exertions  of 
labour  from  every  object,  except  that  of  providing  mere  sub- 
sistence; to  confound  all  intellectual  distinction;  to  busy  the 
mind  continually  in  supplying  the  body's  wants;  until  at  last 
all  classes  should  be  infected  with  the  plague  of  universal 
poverty.  Happily  these  laws  have  been  in  operation  during  a 
period  of  progressive  prosperity,  when  the  funds  for  the  main- 
tenance of  labour  have  regularly  increased,  and  when  an  increase 
of  population  would  be  naturally  called  for.  But  if  our  progress 
should  become  more  slow;  if  we  should  attain  the  stationary 
state,  from  which  I  trust  we  are  yet  far  distant,  then  will  the 
pernicious  nature  of  these  laws  become  more  manifest  and 
alarming;  and  then,  too,  will  their  removal  be  obstructed  by 
many  additional  difficulties. 


CHAPTER  VI 

ON   PROFITS 

The  profits  of  stock,  in  different  employments,  having  been 
shown  to  bear  a  proportion  to  each  other,  and  to  have  a  tendency 
to  vary  all  in  the  same  degree  and  in  the  same  direction,  it 
remains  for  us  to  consider  what  is  the  cause  of  the  permanent 
variations  in  the  rate  of  profit,  and  the  consequent  permanent 
alterations  in  the  rate  of  interest. 

We  have  seen  that  the  price  ^  of  com  is  regulated  by  the 
quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  produce  it,  with  that  portion 
of  capital  which  pays  no  rent.  We  have  seen,  too,  that  all 
manufactured  commodities  rise  and  fall  in  price  in  proportion 
as  more  or  less  labour  becomes  necessary  to  their  production. 
Neither  the  fanner  who  cultivates  that  quantity  of  land  which 
regulates  price,  nor  the  manufacturer  who  manufactures  goods, 
sacrifice  any  portion  of  the  produce  for  rent.  The  whole  value 
of  their  commodities  is  divided  into  two  portions  only:  one 
constitutes  the  profits  of  stock,  the  other  the  wages  of  labour. 

Supposing  com  and  manufactured  goods  always  to  sell  at  the 
same  price,  profits  would  be  high  or  low  in  proportion  as  wages 
were  low  or  high.  But  suppose  corn  to  rise  in  price  because 
more  labour  is  necessary  to  produce  it;  that  cause  will  not  raise 
the  price  of  manufactured  goods  in  the  production  of  which  no 
additional  quantity  of  labour  is  required.  If,  then,  wages  con- 
tinued the  same,  the  profits  of  manufacturers  would  remain  the 
same;  but  if,  as  is  absolutely  certain,  wages  should  rise  with 
the  rise  of  com,  then  their  profits  would  necessarily  fall. 

If  a  manufacturer  always  sold  his  goods  for  the  same  money, 
for  £1000,  for  example,  his  profits  would  depend  on  the  price 
of  the  labour  necessary  to  manufacture  those  goods.  His  profits 
would  be  less  when  wages  amounted  to  £800  than  when  he  paid 
only  £600.  In  proportion  then  as  wages  rose  would  profits  fall. 
But  if  the  price  of  raw  produce  would  increase,  it  may  be  asked 

*  The  readfir  is  desired  to  bear  in  mind  that,  for  the  purpose  of  making 
the  subject  more  clear,  I  consider  money  to  be  invariable  in  value,  and 
therefore  every  variation  of  price  to  be  referable  to  an  alteration  in  the 
value  of  the  commodity. 

64 


On  Profits  65 

whether  the  farmer  at  least  would  not  have  the  same  rate  of 
profits,  although  he  should  pay  an  additional  sum  for  wages? 
Certainly  not:  for  he  will  not  only  have  to  pay,  in  common 
with  the  manufacturer,  an  increase  of  wages  to  each  labourer  he 
employs,  but  he  will  be  obliged  either  to  pay  rent,  or  to  employ 
an  additional  number  of  labourers  to  obtain  the  same  produce; 
and  the  rise  in  the  price  of  raw  produce  will  be  proportioned 
only  to  that  rent,  or  that  additional  number,  and  will  not 
compensate  him  for  the  rise  of  wages. 

If  both  the  manufacturer  and  farmer  employed  ten  men,  on 
wages  rising  from  £24.  to  £25  per  annum  per  man,  the  whole 
sum  paid  by  each  would  be  £250  instead  of  £240.  This  is,  how- 
ever, the  whole  addition  that  would  be  paid  by  the  manufac- 
turer to  obtain  the  same  quantity  of  commodities;  but  the 
farmer  on  new  land  would  probably  be  obliged  to  employ  an 
additional  man,  and  therefore  to  pay  an  additional  sum  of  £25 
for  wages;  and  the  farmer  on  the  old  land  would  be  obliged  to 
pay  precisely  the  same  additional  sum  of  £25  for  rent;  without 
which  additional  labour  com  would  not  have  risen  nor  rent 
have  been  increased.  One  will  therefore  have  to  pay  £275  for 
wages  alone,  the  other  for  wages  and  rent  together;  each  £25 
more  than  the  manufacturer:  for  this  latter  £25  the  farmer  is 
compensated  by  the  addition  to  the  price  of  raw  produce,  and 
therefore  his  profits  still  conform  to  the  profits  of  the  manu- 
facturer. As  this  proposition  is  important,  I  will  endeavour 
still  further  to  elucidate  it. 

We  have  shown  that  in  early  stages  of  society,  both  the  land- 
lord's and  the  labourer's  share  of  the  value  of  the  produce  of 
the  earth  would  be  but  small;  and  that  it  would  increase  in 
proportion  to  the  progress  of  wealth  and  the  difficulty  of  pro- 
curing food.  We  have  shown,  too,  that  although  the  value  of 
the  labourer's  portion  will  be  increased  by  the  high  value  of 
food,  his  real  share  will  be  diminished;  whilst  that  of  the  land- 
lord will  not  only  be  raised  in  value,  but  will  also  be  increased 
in  quantity. 

The  remaining  quantity  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  after  the 
landlord  and  labourer  are  paid,  necessarily  belongs  to  the  farmer, 
and  constitutes  the  profits  of  his  stock.  But  it  may  be  alleged, 
that  though,  as  society  advances,  his  proportion  of  the  whole 
produce  will  be  diminished,  yet  as  it  will  rise  in  value,  he,  as 
well  as  the  landlord  and  labourer,  may,  notwithstanding,  receive 
a  greater  value. 

It  may  be  said,  for  example,  that  when  com  rose  from  £4  to 


66  Political  Economy 

£io,  the  1 80  quarters  obtained  from  the  best  land  would  sell  for 
£1800  instead  of  £720;  and,  therefore,  though  the  landlord  and 
labourer  be  proved  to  have  a  greater  value  for  rent  and  wages, 
still  the  value  of  the  farmer's  profit  might  also  be  augmented. 
This,  however,  is  impossible,  as  I  shall  now  endeavour  to  show. 

In  the  first  place,  the  price  of  corn  would  rise  only  in  proportion 
to  the  increased  difficulty  of  growing  it  on  land  of  a  worse  quality. 

It  has  been  already  remarked,  that  if  the  labour  of  ten  men 
will,  on  land  of  a  certain  quality,  obtain  180  quarters  of  wheat, 
and  its  value  be  £4  per  quarter,  or  £720;  and  if  the  labour  of 
ten  additional  men  will,  on  the  same  or  any  other  land,  produce 
only  170  quarters  in  addition,  wheat  would  rise  from  £4.  to 
£4  45.  Sd.;  for  170  :  180  :  :  £4  :  £4  4s.  Sd.  In  other  words,  as  for 
the  production  of  170  quarters  the  labour  of  ten  men  is  neces- 
sary in  the  one  case,  and  only  that  of  9.44  in  the  other,  the  rise 
would  be  as  9.44  to  10,  or  as  £4  to  £4  4s.  8d.  In  the  same 
manner  it  might  be  shown  that,  if  the  labour  of  ten  additional 
men  would  only  produce  160  quarters,  the  price  would  further 
rise  to  £4  los.;  if  150,  to  £4  165.,  etc.,  etc. 

But  when  180  quarters  were  produced  on  the  land  paying  ^Hl 

no  rent,  and  its  price  was  £4  per  quarter,  it  is  sold  ^"i 

for £720 

And  when  170  quarters  were  produced  on  the  land  paying 
no  rent,  and  the  price  rose  to  £4  45.  Sd.,  it  still  sold 
for 7^ 

So  160  quarters  at  £4  los.  produce        .         .         .         •       7- 

And  150  quarters  at  £4  j6s.  produce  the  same  sum  of     .       720" 

Now,  it  is  evident  that  if,  out  of  these  equal  values,  the 
farmer  is  at  one  time  obliged  to  pay  wages  regulated  by  the 
price  of  wheat  at  £4,  and  at  other  times  at  higher  prices,  the 
rate  of  his  profits  will  diminish  in  proportion  to  the  rise  in  the 
price  of  corn.  iHI 

In  this  case,  therefore,  I  think  it  is  clearly  demonstrated  thaHI 
a  rise  in  the  price  of  com,  which  increases  the  money  wages  of^ 
the  labourer,  diminishes  the  money  value  of  the  farmer's  profits. 

But  the  case  of  the  farmer  of  the  old  and  better  land  will  be  in 
no  way  different;  he  also  will  have  increased  wages  to  pay,  and 
will  never  retain  more  of  the  value  of  the  produce,  however  high 
may  be  its  price,  than  £720  to  be  divided  between  himself  and  his 
always  equal  number  of  labourers;  in  proportion  therefore  as 
they  get  more,  he  must  retain  less. 

When  the  price  of  com  was  at  £4,  the  whole  180  quarters 


j 


On  Profits  67 

belonged  to  the  cultivator,  and  he  sold  it  for  £720.  When  com 
rose  to  £4  45.  Sd.,  he  was  obliged  to  pay  the  value  of  ten  quarters 
out  of  his  180  for  rent,  consequently  the  remaining  170  yielded 
him  no  more  than  £720:  when  it  rose  further  to  £4  10s.,  he  paid 
twenty  quarters,  or  their  value,  for  rent,  and  consequently  only 
retained  160  quarters,  which  yielded  the  same  sum  of  £720. 

It  will  be  seen,  then,  that  whatever  rise  may  take  place  in  the 
price  of  com,  in  consequence  of  the  necessity  of  employing  more 
labour  and  capital  to  obtain  a  given  additional  quantity  of 
produce,  such  rise  will  always  be  equalled  in  value  by  the 
additional  rent  or  additional  labour  employed ;  so  that  whether 
corn  sells  for  £4,  £4  los.,  or  £5  2s.  lod.,  the  farmer  will  obtain 
for  that  which  remains  to  him,  after  paying  rent,  the  same  real 
value.  Thus  we  see  that  whether  the  produce  belonging  to  the 
farmer  be  180,  170,  160,  or  150  quarters,  he  always  obtains  the 
same  sum  of  £720  for  it;  the  price  increasing  in  an  inverse 
proportion  to  the  quantity. 

Rent,  then,  it  appears,  always  falls  on  the  consumer,  and  never 
on  the  farmer;  for  if  the  produce  of  his  farm  should  uniformly 
be  180  quarters,  with  the  rise  of  price  he  would  retain  the  value 
of  a  less  quantity  for  himself,  and  give  the  value  of  a  larger 
quantity  to  his  landlord ;  but  the  deduction  would  be  such  as  to 
leave  him  always  the  same  sum  of  £720. 

It  will  be  seen  too,  that,  in  all  cases,  the  same  sum  of  £720 
must  be  divided  between  wages  and  profits.  If  the  value  of  the 
raw  produce  from  the  land  exceed  this  value  it  belongs  to 
rent,  whatever  may  be  its  amount.  If  there  be  no  excess,  there 
will  be  no  rent.  Whether  wages  or  profits  rise  or  fall,  it  is  this 
sum  of  £720  from  which  they  must  both  be  provided.  On  the 
one  hand,  profits  can  never  rise  so  high  as  to  absorb  so  much 
of  this  £720  that  enough  will  not  be  left  to  furnish  the  labourers 
with  absolute  necessaries;  on  the  other  hand,  wages  can  never 
rise  so  high  as  to  leave  no  portion  of  this  sum  for  profits. 

Thus  in  every  case,  agricultural  as  well  as  manufacturing 
profits  are  lowered  by  a  rise  in  the  price  of  raw  produce,  if  it  be 
accompanied  by  a  rise  of  wages. ^  If  the  farmer  gets  no  addi- 
tional value  for  the  com  which  remains  to  him  after  paying 
rent,  if  the  manufacturer  gets  no  additional  value  for  the  goods 
which  he  manufactures,  and  if  both  are  obliged  to  pay  a  greater 

^  The  reader  is  aware  that  we  are  leaving  out  of  our  consideration  the 
accidental  variations  arising  from  bad  and  good  seasons,  or  from  the 
demand  increasing  or  diminishing  by  any  sudden  effect  on  the  state  of 
population.  We  are  speaking  of  the  natural  and  constant,  not  of  the 
accidental  and  fluctuating,  price  of  corn. 


^ 

4-Unin     ^^' 


68  Political  Economy 

value  in  wages,  can  any  point  be  more  clearly  established  than 
that  profits  must  fall  with  a  rise  of  wages  ? 

The  farmer,  then,  although  he  pays  no  part  of  his  landlord's 
rent,  that  being  always  regulated  by  the  price  of  produce,  and 
invariably  falling  on  the  consumers,  has  however  a  very  decided 
interest  in  keeping  rent  low,  or  rather  in  keeping  the  natural 
price  of  produce  low.  As  a  consumer  of  raw  produce,  and  of 
those  things  into  which  raw  produce  enters  as  a  component  part, 
he  will,  in  common  with  all  other  consumers,  be  interested  in 
keeping  the  price  low.  But  he  is  most  materially  concerned 
with  the  high  price  of  com  as  it  affects  wages.  With  every 
rise  in  the  price  of  com,  he  will  have  to  pay,  out  of  an  equal 
and  unvarying  sum  of  £720,  an  additional  sum  for  wages  to  the 
ten  men  whom  he  is  supposed  constantly  to  employ.  We  have 
seen,  in  treating  on  wages,  that  they  invariably  rise  with  the 
rise  in  the  price  of  raw  produce.  On  a  basis  assumed  for  the 
purpose  of  calculation,  page  58,  it  will  be  seen  that  if  when 
wheat  is  at  £4.  per  quarter,  wages  should  be  £24  per  annum, 
£    s.    d.  £    s 


When  wheat 


is  at    U\l    °      wag«w„uldbe^5-    °  « 
\5     2  loj                                    V27     8     6 

Now,  of  the  unvarying  fund  of  £720  to  be  distributed  between^ 

labourers  and  farmers,  SI 

£    s.    d.                              £     s.     d.                          £  s.  i.~l 

j'4     o     o\                            (-240     o     o^                        r48o  o  o 

When  the      4481            the            247     o    o     the  farmer     473  o  o 

price  of     -<  4  10     o  >■     labourers     -I  255     o     oV        will         <!  465  o  o 

wheat  is  at    4  i6     o  I    will  receive    I  264     o     o  I       receive      I  456  o 

^5     2  loJ  U74     5     oJ  "-445  15 


*  The  180  quarters  of  com  would  be  divided  in  the  following  proportior 
between  landlords,  farmers,  and  labourers,  with  the  above-named  varia- 
tions in  the  value  of  com. 

l^ice  per  qr.  Rent.  Profit.  Wages.  Total. 

i    s.    d.  In  Wheat.       In  Wheat.     In  Wheat. 

400  None.  120  qrs.  60  qrs.  > 

448  10  qrs.  III. 7  58.3  I 

4  10     o  20  103.4  56.6  V180 

4  16     o  30  95  55 

5  2  10  40  86.7  53-3  -* 
and,  under  the  same  circumstances,  money  rent,  wages,  and  profit  would 
be  as  follows: 

Price  per  qr.         Rent.  Profit.  Wages.  Total. 

£    s.    d.  i    s.     d.  £      s.    d.  £      s.    d.  i     s.    d. 

400  None.  480     o     o         240     o     o         720     o     o 

448  42     7     6         473     o     o         247     00         762     7     6 

4  10     o  90     o     o         465     o     o         255     o     o         810     o     o 

4  16     o        144     o     o         456     o    o         264     o     o         864     o    o 

5  2  10        205  13     4         445  X5     o         274     5     o         925  13     4 


On  Profits  69 

And  supposing  that  the  original  capital  of  the  farmer  was  £3000^ 
the  profits  of  his  stock  being  in  the  first  instance  £480,  would  be 
at  the  rate  of  16  per  cent.  When  his  profits  fell  to  £473,  they 
would  be  at  the  rate  of  15.7  per  cent. 

£465 15.S 

£456 15-2 

£445 14-8 

But  the  rate  of  profits  will  fall  still  more,  because  the  capital 
of  the  farmer,  it  must  be  recollected,  consists  in  a  great  measure 
of  raw  produce,  such  as  his  corn  and  hay-ricks,  his  unthreshed 
wheat  and  barley,  his  horses  and  cows,  which  would  all  rise  in 
price  in  consequence  of  the  rise  of  produce.  His  absolute 
profits  would  fall  from  £480  to  £445  i$s.;  but  if,  from  the  cause 
which  I  have  just  stated,  his  capital  should  rise  from  £3000  to 
£3200,  the  rate  of  his  profits  would,  when  corn  was  at  £5  2s.  lod., 
be  under  14  per  cent. 

If  a  manufacturer  had  also  employed  £3000  in  his  business,  he 
would  be  obliged,  in  consequence  of  the  rise  of  wages,  to  increase 
his  capital,  in  order  to  be  enabled  to  carry  on  the  same  business. 
If  his  commodities  sold  before  for  £720  they  would  continue  to 
sell  at  the  same  price;  but  the  wages  of  labour,  which  were 
before  £240,  would  rise,  when  com  was  at  £5  2s.  lod.,  to  £274  5^. 
In  the  first  case  he  would  have  a  balance  of  £480  as  profit  on 
£3000,  in  the  second  he  would  have  a  profit  only  of  £445  155., 
on  an  increased  capital,  and  therefore  his  profits  would  conform 
to  the  altered  rate  of  those  of  the  farmer. 

There  are  few  commodities  which  are  not  more  or  less  aflfected 
in  their  price  by  the  rise  of  raw  produce,  because  some  raw 
material  from  the  land  enters  into  the  composition  of  most 
commodities.  Cotton  goods,  linen,  and  cloth  will  all  rise  in 
price  with  the  rise  of  wheat;  but  they  rise  on  account  of  the 
greater  quantity  of  labour  expended  on  the  raw  material  from 
which  they  are  made,  and  not  because  more  was  paid  by  the 
manufacturer  to  the  labourers  whom  he  employed  on  those 
commodities. 

In  all  cases,  commodities  rise  because  more  labour  is  expended 
on  them,  and  not  because  the  labour  which  is  expended  on  them 
is  at  a  higher  value.  Articles  of  jewellery,  of  iron,  of  plate,  and 
of  copper,  would  not  rise,  because  none  of  the  raw  produce  from 
the  surface  of  the  earth  enters  into  their  composition. 

It  may  be  said  that  I  have  taken  it  for  granted  that  money 
wages  would  rise  with  a  rise  in  the  price  of  raw  produce,  but 


70  Political  Economy 

that  this  is  by  no  means  a  necessary  consequence,  as  the  labourer 
may  be  contented  with  fewer  enjoyments.  It  is  true  that  the 
wages  of  labour  may  previously  have  been  at  a  high  level,  and 
that  they  may  bear  some  reduction.  If  so,  the  fall  of  profits 
will  be  checked ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  that  the  money 
price  of  wages  should  fall  or  remain  stationary  with  a  gradually 
increasing  price  of  necessaries;  and  therefore  it  may  be  taken 
for  granted  that,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  no  permanent 
rise  takes  place  in  the  price  of  necessaries  without  occasioning, 
or  having  been  preceded  by,  a  rise  in  wages. 

The  effects  produced  on  profits  would  have  been  the  same,  or 
nearly  the  same,  if  there  had  been  any  rise  in  the  price  of  those 
other  necessaries,  besides  food,  on  which  the  wages  of  labour  are 
expended.  The  necessity  which  the  labourer  would  be  under  of 
paying  an  increased  price  for  such  necessaries  would  oblige  him 
to  demand  more  wages;  and  whatever  increases  wages,  neces- 
sarily reduces  profits.  But  suppose  the  price  of  silks,  velvets, 
furniture,  and  any  other  commodities,  not  required  by  the 
labourer,  to  rise  in  consequence  of  more  labour  being  expended 
on  them,  would  not  that  affect  profits?  Certainly  not:  for 
nothing  can  affect  profits  but  a  rise  in  wages;  silks  and  velvets 
are  not  consumed  by  the  labourer,  and  therefore  cannot  raise 
wages. 

It  is  to  be  understood  that  I  am  speaking  of  profits  generally. 
I  have  already  remarked  that  the  market  price  of  a  commodity 
may  exceed  its  natural  or  necessary  price,  as  it  may  be  produced 
in  less  abundance  than  the  new  demand  for  it  requires.  This, 
however,  is  but  a  temporary  effect.  The  high  profits  on  capital 
employed  in  producing  that  commodity  will  naturally  attract 
capital  to  that  trade;  and  as  soon  as  the  requisite  funds  are 
supplied,  and  the  quantity  of  the  commodity  is  duly  increased, 
its  price  will  fall,  and  the  profits  of  the  trade  will  conform  to  the 
general  level.  A  fall  in  the  general  rate  of  profits  is  by  no  means 
incompatible  with  a  partial  rise  of  profits  in  particular  employ- 
ments. It  is  through  the  inequality  of  profits  that  capital  is 
moved  from  one  employment  to  another.  Whilst,  then,  general 
profits  are  falling,  and  gradually  settling  at  a  lower  level  in 
consequence  of  the  rise  of  wages,  and  the  increasing  diflSculty 
of  supplying  the  increasing  population  with  necessaries,  the 
profits  of  the  farmer  may,  for  an  interval  of  some  little  duration, 
be  above  the  former  level.  An  extraordinary  stimulus  may  be 
also  given  for  a  certain  time  to  a  particular  branch  of  foreign 
and  colonial  trade;  but  the  admission  of  this  fact  by  no  means 


On  Profits  71 

invalidates  the  theory,  that  profits  depend  on  high  or  low 
wages,  wages  on  the  price  of  necessaries,  and  the  price  of  neces- 
saries chiefly  on  the  price  of  food,  because  all  other  requisites 
may  be  increased  almost  without  limit. 

It  should  be  recollected  that  prices  always  vary  in  the  market, 
and  in  the  first  instance,  through  the  comparative  state  of 
demand  and  supply.  Although  cloth  could  be  furnished  at  405. 
per  yard,  and  give  the  usual  profits  of  stock,  it  may  rise  to 
605.  or  805.  from  a  general  change  of  fashion,  or  from  any  other 
cause  which  should  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  increase  the 
demand  or  diminish  the  supply  of  it.  The  makers  of  cloth  will 
for  a  time  have  unusual  profits,  but  capital  will  naturally  flow 
to  that  manufacture,  till  the  supply  and  demand  are  again  at 
their  fair  level,  when  the  price  of  cloth  will  again  sink  to  405., 
its  natural  or  necessary  price.  In  the  same  manner,  with  every 
increased  demand  for  corn,  it  may  rise  so  high  as  to  afford  more 
than  the  general  profits  to  the  farmer.  If  there  be  plenty  of 
fertile  land,  the  price  of  corn  will  again  fall  to  its  former  stan- 
dard, after  the  requisite  quantity  of  capital  has  been  employed 
in  producing  it,  and  profits  will  be  as  before;  but  if  there  be 
not  plenty  of  fertile  land,  if,  to  produce  this  additional  quantity, 
more  than  the  usual  quantity  of  capital  and  labour  be  required, 
corn  will  not  fall  to  its  former  level.  Its  natural  price  will  be 
raised,  and  the  farmer,  instead  of  obtaining  permanently  larger 
profits,  will  find  himself  obliged  to  be  satisfied  with  the  dimin- 
ished rate  which  is  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the  rise  of 
wages,  produced  by  the  rise  of  necessaries. 

The  natural  tendency  of  profits  then  is  to  fall;  for,  in  the 
progress  of  society  and  wealth,  the  additional  quantity  of  food 
required  is  obtained  by  the  sacrifice  of  more  and  more  labour. 
This  tendency,  this  gravitation  as  it  were  of  profits,  is  happily 
checked  at  repeated  intervals  by  the  improvements  in  machinery 
connected  with  the  production  of  necessaries,  as  well  as  by 
discoveries  in  the  science  of  agriculture,  which  enable  us  to 
relinquish  a  portion  of  labour  before  required,  and  therefore  to 
lower  the  price  of  the  prime  necessary  of  the  labourer.  The 
rise  in  the  price  of  necessaries  and  in  the  wages  of  labour  is, 
however,  limited;  for  as  soon  as  wages  should  be  equal  (as  in 
the  case  formerly  stated)  to  £720,  the  whole  receipts  of  the 
farmer,  there  must  be  an  end  of  accumulation;  for  no  capital 
can  then  yield  any  profit  whatever,  and  no  additional  labour 
can  be  demanded,  and  consequently  population  will  have 
reached  its  highest  point.    Long,  indeed,  before  this  period. 


72  Political  Economy 

the  very  low  rate  of  profits  will  have  arrested  all  accumulation, 
and  almost  the  whole  produce  of  the  country,  after  paying  the 
labourers,  will  be  the  property  of  the  owners  of  land  and  the 
receivers  of  tithes  and  taxes. 

Thus,  taking  the  former  very  imperfect  basis  as  the  grounds 
of  my  calculation,  it  would  appear  that  when  corn  was  at  £20 
per  quarter,  the  whole  net  income  of  the  country  would  belong 
to  the  landlords,  for  then  the  same  quantity  of  labour  that  was 
originally  necessary  to  produce  180  quarters  would  be  necessary 
to  produce  36;  since  £20  :  £4  :  :  180  :  36.  The  farmer,  then, 
who  produced  180  quarters  (if  any  such  there  were,  for  the  old 
and  new  capital  employed  on  the  land  would  be  so  blended 
that  it  could  in  no  way  be  distinguished),  would  sell  the 

180  qrs.  at  £20  per  qr.  or      .  ,  .  .  ,       £3600 

the  value  of  144  qrs.  \  *°  l^^lord  for  rent,  being  the  difference  )  gg 

^^  ^       \  between  36  and  180  qrs.  j 

36  qrs.  720 

the  value  of    36  qrs.  to  labourers,  ten  in  number       .  .         ,  720 

leaving  nothing  whatever  for  profit. 

I  have  supposed  that  at  this  price  of  £20  the  labourers  would  continue  to 
consume  three  quarters  each  per  annum,  or       £60 

And  that  on  the  other  commodities  they  would 

expend  ......  12 

72  for  each  labourer. 
And  therefore  ten  labourers  would  cost  £720  per  annum. 

In  all  these  calculations  I  have  been  desirous  only  to  elucidate 
the  principle,  and  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  observe  that  my 
whole  basis  is  assumed  at  random,  and  merely  for  the  purpose 
of  exemplification.  The  results,  though  different  in  degree, 
would  have  been  the  same  in  principle,  however  accurately 
I  might  have  set  out  in  stating  the  difference  in  the  number  of 
labourers  necessary  to  obtain  the  successive  quantities  of  com 
required  by  an  increasing  population,  the  quantity  consumed 
by  the  labourer's  family,  etc.,  etc.  My  object  has  been  to 
simplify  the  subject,  and  I  have  therefore  made  no  allowance 
for  the  increasing  price  of  the  other  necessaries,  besides  food,  of 
the  labourer;  an  increase  which  would  be  the  consequence  of 
the  increased  value  of  the  raw  materials  from  which  they  are 
made,  and  which  would  of  course  further  increase  wages  and 
lower  profits. 

I  have  already  said  that  long  before  this  state  of  prices  was 
become  permanent  there  would  be  no  motive  for  accumulation ; 


ion.    ™i 


On  Profits  73 

for  no  one  accumulates  but  with  a  view  to  make  his  accumula- 
tion productive,  and  it  is  only  when  so  employed  that  it  operates 
on  profits.  Without  a  motive  there  could  be  no  accumulation, 
and  consequently  such  a  state  of  prices  never  could  take  place. 
The  farmer  and  manufacturer  can  no  more  live  without  profit 
than  the  labourer  without  wages.  Their  motive  for  accumula- 
tion will  diminish  with  every  diminution  of  profit,  and  will 
cease  altogether  when  their  profits  are  so  low  as  not  to  afford 
them  an  adequate  compensation  for  their  trouble,  and  the  risk 
which  they  must  necessarily  encounter  in  employing  their 
capital  productively. 

I  must  again  observe  that  the  rate  of  profits  would  fall  much 
more  rapidly  than  I  have  estimated  in  my  calculation;  for  the 
value  of  the  produce  being  what  I  have  stated  it  under  the 
circumstances  supposed,  the  value  of  the  farmer's  stock  would 
be  greatly  increased  from  its  necessarily  consisting  of  many  of 
the  commodities  which  had  risen  in  value.  Before  corn  could 
rise  from  £4  to  £12,  his  capital  would  probably  be  doubled  in 
exchangeable  value,  and  be  worth  £6000  instead  of  £3000. 
If  then  his  profit  were  £180,  or  6  per  cent,  on  his  original  capital, 
profits  would  not  at  that  time  be  really  at  a  higher  rate  than 
3  per  cent.;  for  £6000  at  3  per  cent,  gives  £180;  and  on  those 
terms  only  could  a  new  farmer  with  £6000  money  in  his  pocket 
enter  into  the  farming  business. 

Many  trades  would  derive  some  advantage,  more  or  less,  from 
the  same  source.  The  brewer,  the  distiller,  the  clothier,  the 
linen  manufacturer,  would  be  partly  compensated  for  the 
diminution  of  their  profits  by  the  rise  in  the  value  of  their  stock 
of  raw  and  finished  materials;  but  a  manufacturer  of  hardware, 
of  jewellery,  and  of  many  other  commodities,  as  well  as  those 
whose  capitals  uniformly  consisted  of  money,  would  be  subject 
to  the  whole  fall  in  the  rate  of  profits,  without  any  compensation 
whatever. 

We  should  also  expect  that,  however  the  rate  of  the  profits 
of  stock  might  diminish  in  consequence  of  the  accumulation  of 
capital  on  the  land,  and  the  rise  of  wages,  yet  that  the  aggregate 
amount  of  profits  would  increase.  Thus,  supposing  that,  with 
repeated  accumulations  of  £100,000,  the  rate  of  profit  should 
fall  from  20  to  19,  to  18,  to  17  per  cent.,  a  constantly  diminishing 
rate,  we  should  expect  that  the  whole  amount  of  profits  received 
by  those  successive  owners  of  capital  would  be  always  pro- 
gressive; that  it  would  be  greater  when  the  capital  was  £200,000 
than  when  £100,000;   still  greater  when  £300,000;   and  so  on, 


74  Political  Economy 

increasing,  though  at  a  diminishing  rate,  with  every  increase  o 
capital.  This  progression,  however,  is  only  true  for  a  certain 
time;  thus,  19  per  cent,  on  £200,000  is  more  than  20  on 
£100,000;  again,  18  per  cent,  on  £300,000  is  more  than  19  per 
cent,  on  £200,000;  but  after  capital  has  accumulated  to  a  large 
amount,  and  profits  have  fallen,  the  further  accumulation 
diminishes  the  aggregate  of  profits.  Thus,  suppose  the  accu- 
mulation should  be  £1,000,000,  and  the  profits  7  per  cent.,  the 
whole  amount  of  profits  will  be  £70,000;  now  if  an  addition  of 
£100,000  capital  be  made  to  the  million,  and  profits  should  fall 
to  6  per  cent.,  £66,000  or  a  diminution  of  £4000  will  be  received 
by  the  owners  of  stock,  although  the  whole  amount  of  stock 
will  be  increased  from  £1,000,000  to  £1,100,000. 

There  can,  however,  be  no  accumulation  of  capital  so  long 
as  stock  yields  any  profit  at  all,  without  its  yielding  not  only 
an  increase  of  produce,  but  an  increase  of  value.  By  employing 
£100,000  additional  capital,  no  part  of  the  former  capital  will 
be  rendered  less  productive.  The  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  the  country  must  increase,  and  its  value  will  be  raised,  not 
only  by  the  value  of  the  addition  which  is  made  to  the  former 
quantity  of  productions,  but  by  the  new  value  which  is  given 
to  the  whole  produce  of  the  land,  by  the  increased  difficulty  of 
producing  the  last  portion  of  it.  When  the  accumulation  of 
capital,  however,  becomes  very  great,  notwithstanding  this 
increased  value,  it  will  be  so  distributed  that  a  less  value  than 
before  will  be  appropriated  to  profits,  while  that  which  is  devoted 
to  rent  and  wages  will  be  increased.  Thus  with  successive 
additions  of  £100,000  to  capital,  with  a  fall  in  the  rate  of  profits, 
from  20  to  19,  to  18,  to  17  per  cent.,  etc.,  the  productions 
annually  obtained  will  increase  in  quantity,  and  be  of  more  than 
the  whole  additional  value  which  the  additional  capital  is 
calculated  to  produce.  From  £20,000  it  will  rise  to  more  than 
£39,000,  and  then  to  more  than  £57,000,  and  when  the  capital 
employed  is  a  million,  as  we  before  supposed,  if  £100,000  more 
be  added  to  it,  and  the  aggregate  of  profits  is  actually  lower 
than  before,  more  than  £6000  will  nevertheless  be  added  to  the 
revenue  of  the  country,  but  it  will  be  to  the  revenue  of  the 
landlords  and  labourers;  they  will  obtain  more  than  the  addi- 
tional produce,  and  will  from  their  situation  be  enabled  to 
encroach  even  on  the  former  gains  of  the  capitalist.  Thus, 
suppose  the  price  of  corn  to  be  £4  per  quarter,  and  that  there- 
fore, as  we  before  calculated,  of  every  £720  remaining  to  the 
farmer  after  payment  of  his  rent,  £480  were  retained  by  him, 


On  Profits  75 

and  £240  were  paid  to  his  labourers;  when  the  price  rose  to  £6 
per  quarter,  he  would  be  obliged  to  pay  his  labourers  £300  and 
retain  only  £420  for  profits:  he  would  be  obliged  to  pay  them 
£300  to  enable  them  to  consume  the  same  quantity  of  neces- 
saries as  before,  and  no  more.  Now  if  the  capital  employed 
were  so  large  as  to  yield  a  hundred  thousand  times  £720,  or 
£72,000,000,  the  aggregate  of  profits  would  be  £48,000,000 
when  wheat  was  at  £4  per  quarter;  and  if  by  employing  a 
larg(?r  capital  105,000  times  £720  were  obtained  when  wheat 
was  at  £6,  or  £75,600,000,  profits  would  actually  fall  from 
£48,000,000  to  £44,100,000  or  105,000  times  £420,  and  wages 
would  rise  from  £24,000,000  to  £31,500,000.  Wages  would  rise 
because  more  labourers  would  be  employed  in  proportion  to 
capital;  and  each  labourer  would  receive  more  money  wages; 
but  the  condition  of  the  labourer,  as  we  have  already  shown, 
would  be  worse,  inasmuch  as  he  would  be  able  to  command  a 
less  quantity  of  the  produce  of  the  country.  The  only  real 
gainers  would  be  the  landlords;  they  would  receive  higher  rents, 
first,  because  produce  would  be  of  a  higher  value,  and  secondly, 
because  they  would  have  a  greatly  increased  proportion  of  that 
produce. 

Although  a  greater  value  is  produced,  a  greater  proportion  of 
what  remains  of  that  value,  after  paying  rent,  is  consumed  by 
the  producers,  and  it  is  this,  and  this  alone,  which  regulates 
profits.  Whilst  the  land  yields  abundantly,  wages  may  tem- 
porarily rise,  and  the  producers  may  consume  more  than  their 
accustomed  proportion;  but  the  stimulus  which  will  thus  be 
given  to  population  will  speedily  reduce  the  labourers  to  their 
usual  consumption.  But  when  poor  lands  are  taken  into  culti- 
vation, or  when  more  capital  and  labour  are  expended  on  the 
old  land,  with  a  less  return  of  produce,  the  effect  must  be 
permanent.  A  greater  proportion  of  that  part  of  the  produce 
which  remains  to  be  divided,  after  paying  rent,  between  the 
owners  of  stock  and  the  labourers,  will  be  apportioned  to  the 
latter.  Each  man  may,  and  probably  will,  have  a  less  absolute 
quantity;  but  as  more  labourers  are  employed  in  proportion  to 
the  whole  produce  retained  by  the  farmer,  the  value  of  a  greater 
proportion  of  the  whole  produce  will  be  absorbed  by  wages,  and 
consequently  the  value  of  a  smaller  proportion  will  be  devoted 
to  profits.  This  will  necessarily  be  rendered  permanent  by  the 
laws  of  nature,  which  have  limited  the  productive  powers  of 
the  land. 

Thus  we  again  arrive  at  the  same  conclusion  which  we  have 


76  Political  Economy 

before  attempted  to  establish: — that  in  all  countries,  and  all 
times,  profits  depend  on  the  quantity  of  labour  requisite  to 
provide  necessaries  for  the  labourers  on  that  land  or  with  that 
capital  which  yields  no  rent.  The  effects  then  of  accumulation 
will  be  different  in  different  countries,  and  will  depend  chiefly 
on  the  fertility  of  the  land.  However  extensive  a  country  may 
be  where  the  land  is  of  a  poor  quality,  and  where  the  importa- 
tion of  food  is  prohibited,  the  most  moderate  accumulations  of 
capital  will  be  attended  with  great  reductions  in  the  rate  of 
profit  and  a  rapid  rise  in  rent;  and  on  the  contrary  a  small  but 
fertile  country,  particularly  if  it  freely  permits  the  importation 
of  food,  may  accumulate  a  large  stock  of  capital  without  any 
great  diminution  in  the  rate  of  profits,  or  any  great  increase  in 
the  rent  of  land.  In  the  Chapter  on  Wages  we  have  endeav- 
oured to  show  that  the  money  price  of  commodities  would  not 
be  raised  by  a  rise  of  wages,  either  on  the  supposition  that  gold, 
the  standard  of  money,  was  the  produce  of  this  country,  or  that 
it  was  imported  from  abroad.  But  if  it  were  otherwise,  if  the 
prices  of  commodities  were  permanently  raised  by  high  wages, 
the  proposition  would  not  be  less  true,  which  asserts  that  high 
wages  invariably  affect  the  employers  of  labour  by  depriving 
them  of  a  portion  of  their  real  profits.  Supposing  the  hatter, 
the  hosier,  and  the  shoemaker  each  paid  £io  more  wages  in  the 
manufacture  of  a  particular  quantity  of  their  commodities,  and 
that  the  price  of  hats,  stockings,  and  shoes  rose  by  a  sum 
sufficient  to  repay  the  manufacturer  the  £10;  their  situation 
would  be  no  better  than  if  no  such  rise  took  place.  If  the 
hosier  sold  his  stockings  for  £110  instead  of  £100,  his  profits 
would  be  precisely  the  same  money  amount  as  before;  but  as 
he  would  obtain  in  exchange  for  this  equal  sum,  one-tenth  less 
of  hats,  shoes,  and  every  other  commodity,  and  as  he  could 
with  his  former  amount  of  savings  employ  fewer  labourers  at 
the  increased  wages,  and  purchase  fewer  raw  materials  at  the 
increased  prices,  he  would  be  in  no  better  situation  than  if  his 
money  profits  had  been  really  diminished  in  amount  and  every- 
thing had  remained  at  its  former  price.  L.Xhus,  then,.  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show,  first,  that  a  rise  of  wages  would  not  raise 
the  price  of  commodities,  but  would  invariably  lower  profits; 
and  secondly,  that  if  the  prices  of  all  commodities  could  be 
raised,  still  the  effect  on  profits  would  be  the  same;  and  that, 
in  fact,  the  value  of  the  medium  only  in  which  prices  and  profits 
are  estimated  would  be  lowered. 


CHAPTER  VII 

ON   FOREIGN  TRADE 

No  extension  of  foreign  trade  will  immediately  increase  the 
amount  of  value  in  a  country,  although  it  will  very  powerfully 
contribute  to  increase  the  mass  of  commodities,  and  therefore 
the  sum  of  enjoyments.  As  the  value  of  all  foreign  goods  is 
measured  by  the  quantity  of  the  produce  of  our  land  and  labour 
which  is  given  in  exchange  for  them,  we  should  have  no  greater 
value  if,  by  the  discovery  of  new  markets,  we  obtained  double 
the  quantity  of  foreign  goods  in  exchange  for  a  given  quantity 
of  ours.  If  by  the  purchase  of  English  goods  to  the  amount  of 
£1000  a  merchant  can  obtain  a  quantity  of  foreign  goods, 
which  he  can  sell  in  the  English  market  for  £1200,  he  will 
obtain  20  per  cent,  profit  by  such  an  employment  of  his  capital; 
but  neither  his  gains,  nor  the  value  of  the  commodities  imported, 
will  be  increased  or  diminished  by  the  greater  or  smaller  quantity 
of  foreign  goods  obtained.  Whether,  for  example,  he  imports 
twenty-five  or  fifty  pipes  of  wine,  his  interest  can  be  no  way 
affected  if  at  one  time  the  twenty-five  pipes,  and  at  another 
the  fifty  pipes,  equally  sell  for  £1200.  In  either  case  his  profit 
will  be  limited  to  £200,  or  20  per  cent,  on  his  capital;  and  in 
either  case  the  same  value  will  be  imported  into  England.  If 
the  fifty  pipes  sold  for  more  than  £1200,  the  profits  of  this 
individual  merchant  would  exceed  the  general  rate  of  profits, 
and  capital  would  naturally  flow  into  this  advantageous  trade, 
till  the  fall  of  the  price  of  wine  had  brought  everything  to  the 
former  level. 

It  has  indeed  been  contended  that  the  great  profits  which 
are  sometimes  made  by  particular  merchants  in  foreign  trade 
will  elevate  the  general  rate  of  profits  in  the  country,  and  that 
the  abstraction  of  capital  from  other  employments,  to  partake 
of  the  new  and  beneficial  foreign  commerce,  will  raise  prices 
generally,  and  thereby  increase  profits.  It  has  been  said,  by 
high  authority,  that  less  capital  being  necessarily  devoted  to 
the  growth  of  com,  to  the  manufacture  of  cloth,  hats,  shoes, 
etc.,  while  the  demand  continues  the  same,  the  price  of  these 

77 


78  Political  Economy 

commodities  will  be  so  increased,  that  the  farmer,  hatter, 
clothier,  and  shoemaker  will  have  an  increase  of  profits  as  well 
as  the  foreign  merchant.^ 

They  who  hold  this  argument  agree  with  me  that  the  profits 
of  different  employments  have  a  tendency  to  conform  to  one 
another;  to  advance  and  recede  together.  Our  variance  con- 
sists in  this:  They  contend  that  the  equahty  of  profits  will  be 
brought  about  by  the  general  rise  of  profits;  and  I  am  of  opinion 
that  the  profits  of  the  favoured  trade  will  speedily  subside  to 
the  general  level. 

For,  first,  I  deny  that  less  capital  will  necessarily  be  devoted 
to  the  growth  of  com,  to  the  manufacture  of  cloth,  hats,  shoes, 
etc.,  unless  the  demand  for  these  commodities  be  diminished; 
and  if  so,  their  price  will  not  rise.  In  the  purchase  of  foreign 
commodities,  either  the  same,  a  larger,  or  a  less  portion  of  the 
produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  England  will  be  employed. 
If  the  same  portion  be  so  employed,  then  will  the  same  demand 
exist  for  cloth,  shoes^  com,  and  hats  as  before,  and  the  same 
portion  of  capital  will  be  devoted  to  their  production.  If,  in 
consequence  of  the  price  of  foreign  commodities  being  cheaper, 
a  less  portion  of  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of 
England  is  employed  in  the  purchase  of  foreign  commodities, 
more  will  remain  for  the  purchase  of  other  things.  If  there  be 
a  greater  demand  for  hats,  shoes,  com,  etc.,  than  before,  which 
there  may  be,  the  consumers  of  foreign  commodities  having  an 
additional  portion  of  their  revenue  disposable,  the  capital  is  also 
disposable  with  which  the  greater  value  of  foreign  commodities 
was  before  purchased;  so  that  with  the  increased  demand  for 
corn,  shoes,  etc.,  there  exists  also  the  means  of  procuring  an 
increased  supply,  and  therefore  neither  prices  nor  profits  can 
permanently  rise.  If  more  of  the  produce  of  the  land  and 
labour  of  England  be  employed  in  the  purchase  of  foreign  com- 
modities, less  can  be  employed  in  the  purchase  of  other  things, 
and  therefore  fewer  hats,  shoes,  etc.,  will  be  required.  At  the 
same  time  that  capital  is  liberated  from  the  production  of 
shoes,  hats,  etc.,  more  must  be  employed  in  manufacturing 
those  commodities  with  which  foreign  commodities  are  pur- 
chased; and,  consequently,  in  all  cases  the  demand  for  foreign 
and  home  commodities  together,  as  far  as  regards  value,  is 
limited  by  the  revenue  and  capital  of  the  country.  If  one 
increases  the  other  must  diminish.  If  the  quantity  of  wine 
imported  in  exchange  for  the  same  quantity  of  English  com- 
*  See  Adam  Smith,  book  i.  chap.  9. 


On  Foreign  Trade  79 

modities  be  doubled,  the  people  of  England  can  either  consume 
double  the  quantity  of  wine  that  they  did  before,  or  the  same 
quantity  of  wine  and  a  greater  quantity  of  English  commodities. 
If  my  revenue  had  been  £1000  with  which  I  purchased  annually 
one  pipe  of  wine  for  £100,  and  a  certain  quantity  of  English 
commodities  for  £900;  when  wine  fell  to  £50  per  pipe,  I  might 
lay  out  the  £50  saved,  either  in  the  purchase  of  an  additional 
pipe  of  wine  or  in  the  purchase  of  more  English  commodities. 
If  I  bought  more  wine,  and  every  wine-drinker  did  the  same, 
the  foreign  trade  would  not  be  in  the  least  disturbed;  the  same 
quantity  of  English  commodities  would  be  exported  in  exchange 
for  wine,  and  we  should  receive  double  the  quantity,  though 
not  double  the  value  of  wine.  But  if  I,  and  others,  contented 
ourselves  with  the  same  quantity  of  wine  as  before,  fewer 
Enghsh  commodities  would  be  exported,  and  the  wine-drinkers 
might  either  consume  the  commodities  which  were  before 
exported,  or  any  others  for  which  they  had  an  inclination.  The 
capital  required  for  their  production  would  be  supplied  by  the 
capital  liberated  from  the  foreign  trade. 

There  are  two  ways  in  which  capital  may  be  accumulated; 
it  may  be  saved  either  in  consequence  of  increased  revenue  or 
of  diminished  consumption.  If  my  profits  are  raised  from 
£1000  to  £1200,  while  my  expenditure  continues  the  same,  I 
accumulate  annually  £200  more  than  I  did  before.  If  I  save 
£200  out  of  my  expenditure,  while  my  profits  continue  the  same, 
the  same  effect  will  be  produced ;  £200  per  annum  will  be  added 
to  my  capital.  The  merchant  who  imported  wine  after  profits 
had  been  raised  from  20  per  cent,  to  40  per  cent.,  instead  of 
purchasing  his  English  goods  for  £1000,  must  purchase  them 
for  £857  25.  lod.,  still  selling  the  wine  which  he  imports  in 
return  for  those  goods  for  £1200;  or,  if  he  continued  to  purchase 
his  English  goods  for  £1000,  must  raise  the  price  of  his  wine 
to  £1400;  he  would  thus  obtain  40  instead  of  20  per  cent,  profit 
on  his  capital;  but  if,  in  consequence  of  the  cheapness  of  all  the 
commodities  on  which  his  revenue  was  expended,  he  and  all 
other  consumers  could  save  the  value  of  £200  out  of  every  £iooO' 
they  before  expended,  they  would  more  effectually  add  to  the 
real  wealth  of  the  country;  in  one  case,  the  savings  would  be 
made  in  consequence  of  an  increase  of  revenue,  in  the  other,  in^ 
consequence  of  diminished  expenditure. 

If,  by  the  introduction  of  machinery,  the  generality  of  the 
commodities  on  which  revenue  was  expended  fell  20  per  cent, 
in  value,  I  should  be  enabled  to  save  as  effectually  as  if  my 


8o  Political  Economy 

revenue  had  been  raised  20  per  cent.;  but  in  one  case  the  rate 
of  profits  is  stationary,  in  the  other  it  is  raised  20  per  cent. — If, 
by  the  introduction  of  cheap  foreign  goods,  I  can  save  20  per 
cent,  from  my  expenditure,  the  effect  will  be  precisely  the  same 
as  if  machinery  had  lowered  the  expense  of  their  production, 
but  profits  would  not  be  raised. 

It  is  not,  therefore,  in  consequence  of  the  extension  of  the 
market  that  the  rate  of  profit  is  raised,  although  such  extension 
may  be  equally  efficacious  in  increasing  the  mass  of  commo- 
dities, and  may  thereby  enable  us  to  augment  the  funds  destined 
for  the  maintenance  of  labour,  and  the  materials  on  which 
labour  may  be  employed.  It  is  quite  as  important  to  the  happi- 
ness of  mankind  that  our  enjoyments  should  be  increased  by 
the  better  distribution  of  labour,  by  each  country  producing 
those  commodities  for  which  by  its  situation,  its  climate,  and 
its  other  natural  or  artificial  advantages  it  is  adapted,  and  by 
their  exchanging  them  for  the  commodities  of  other  countries, 
as  that  they  should  be  augmented  by  a  rise  in  the  rate  of  profits. 

It  has  been  my  endeavour  to  show  throughout  this  work 
that  the  rate  of  profits  can  never  be  increased  but  by  a  fall  in 
wages,  and  that  there  can  be  no  permanent  fall  of  wages  but  in 
consequence  of  a  fall  of  the  necessaries  on  which  wages  are 
expended.  If,  therefore,  by  the  extension  of  foreign  trade,  or 
by  improvements  in  machinery,  the  food  and  necessaries  of  the 
labourer  can  be  brought  to  market,  at  a  reduced  price,  profits 
will  rise.  If,  instead  of  growing  our  own  corn,  or  manufacturing 
the  clothing  and  other  necessaries  of  the  labourer,  we  discover 
a  new  market  from  which  we  can  supply  ourselves  with  these 
commodities  at  a  cheaper  price,  wages  will  fall  and  profits  rise; 
but  if  the  commodities  obtained  at  a  cheaper  rate,  by  the  exten- 
sion of  foreign  commerce,  or  by  the  improvement  of  machinery, 
be  exclusively  the  commodities  consumed  by  the  rich,  no 
alteration  will  take  place  in  the  rate  of  profits.  The  rate  of 
wages  would  not  be  affected,  although  wine,  velvets,  silks,  and 
other  expensive  commodities  should  fall  50  per  cent,,  and 
consequently  profits  would  continue  unaltered. 

Foreign  trade,  then,  though  highly  beneficial  to  a  country,  as 
it  increases  the  amount  and  variety  of  the  objects  on  which 
revenue  may  b$  expended,  and  affords,  by  the  abundance  and 
cheapness  of  commodities,  incentives  to  saving,  and  to  the 
accumulation  of  capital,  has  no  tendency  to  raise  the  profits  of 
stock  unless  the  commodities  imported  be  of  that  description 
on  which  the  wages  of  labour  are  expended. 


On  Foreign  Trade  8 1 

The  remarks  which  have  been  made  respecting  foreign  trade 
apply  equally  to  home  trade.  The  rate  of  profits  is  never 
increased  by  a  better  distribution  of  labour,  by  the  invention 
of  machinery,  by  the  establishment  of  roads  and  canals,  or  by 
any  means  of  abridging  labour  either  in  the  manufacture  or  in  the 
conveyance  of  goods.  These  are  causes  which  operate  on  price, 
and  never  fail  to  be  highly  beneficial  to  consumers;  since  they 
enable  them,  with  the  same  labour,  or  with  the  value  of  the 
produce  of  the  same  labour,  to  obtain  in  exchange  a  greater 
quantity  of  the  commodity  to  which  the  improvement  is  applied ; 
but  they  have  no  effect  whatever  on  profit.  On  the  other  hand, 
every  diminution  in  the  wages  of  labour  raises  profits,  but 
produces  no  effect  on  the  price  of  commodities.  One  is  advan- 
tageous to  all  classes,  for  all  classes  are  consumers;  the  other 
is  beneficial  only  to  producers ;  they  gain  more,  but  everything 
remains  at  its  former  price.  In  the  first  case  they  get  the  same 
as  before;  but  everything  on  which  their  gains  are  expended 
is  diminished  in  exchangeable  value. 

The  same  rule  which  regulates  the  relative  value  of  com- 
modities in  one  country  does  not  regulate  the  relative  value  of 
the  commodities  exchanged  between  two  or  more  countries. 

Under  a  system  of  perfectly  free  commerce,  each  country 
naturally  devotes  its  capital  and  labour  to  such  employments 
as  are  most  beneficial  to  each.  This  pursuit  of  individual 
advantage  is  admirably  connected  with  the  universal  good  of 
the  whole.  By  stimulating  industry,  by  rewarding  ingenuity, 
and  by  using  most  efficaciously  the  pecuhar  powers  bestowed 
by  nature,  it  distributes  labour  most  effectively  and  most 
economically:  while,  by  increasing  the  general  mass  of  pro- 
ductions, it  diffuses  general  benefit,  and  binds  together,  by  one 
common  tie  of  interest  and  intercourse,  the  universal  society 
of  nations  throughout  the  civilised  world.  It  is  this  principle 
which  determines  that  wine  shall  be  made  in  France  and 
Portugal,  that  com  shall  be  grown  in  America  and  Poland, 
and  that  hardware  and  other  goods  shall  be  manufactured  in 
England. 

In  one  and  the  same  country,  profits  are,  generally  speaking, 
always  on  the  same  level;  or  differ  only  as  the  employment  of 
capital  may  be  more  or  less  secure  and  agreeable.  It  is  not  so 
between  different  countries.  If  the  profits  of  capital  employed 
in  Yorkshire  should  exceed  those  of  capital  employed  in  London, 
capital  would  speedily  move  from  London  to  Yorkshire,  and  an 
equality  of  profits  would  be  effected;   but  if  in  consequence  of 

F 


frnm  ^■1 


82  Political  Economy 

the  diminished  rate  of  production  in  the  lands  of  England  from 
the  increase  of  capital  and  population  wages  should  rise  and 
profits  fall,  it  would  not  follow  that  capital  and  population 
would  necessarily  move  from  England  to  Holland,  or  Spain,  or 
Russia,  where  profits  might  be  higher. 

If  Portugal  had  no  commercial  connection  with  other  coun- 
tries, instead  of  employing  a  great  part  of  her  capital  and 
industry  in  the  production  of  wines,  with  which  she  purchases 
for  her  own  use  the  cloth  and  hardware  of  other  countries,  she 
would  be  obliged  to  devote  a  part  of  that  capital  to  the  manu- 
facture of  those  commodities,  which  she  would  thus  obtain 
probably  inferior  in  quality  as  well  as  quantity. 

The  quantity  of  wine  which  she  shall  give  in  exchange  for  the 
cloth  of  England  is  not  determined  by  the  respective  quantities 
of  labour  devoted  to  the  production  of  each,  as  it  would  be  if 
both  commodities  were  manufactured  in  England,  or  both  in 
Portugal. 

England  may  be  so  circumstanced  that  to  produce  the  cloth 
may  require  the  labour  of  100  men  for  one  year;  and  if  she 
attempted  to  make  the  wine,  it  might  require  the  labour  of 
120  men  for  the  same  time.  England  would  therefore  find  it 
her  interest  to  import  wine,  and  to  purchase  it  by  the  exportatioaJB I 
of  cloth.  91 

To  produce  the  wine  in  Portugal  might  require  only  the  labour 
of  80  men  for  one  year,  and  to  produce  the  cloth  in  the  same 
country  might  require  the  labour  of  90  men  for  the  same  time. 
It  would  therefore  be  advantageous  for  her  to  export  wine  in 
exchange  for  cloth.  This  exchange  might  even  take  place 
notwithstanding  that  the  commodity  imported  by  Portugal 
could  be  produced  there  with  less  labour  than  in  England. 
Though  she  could  make  the  cloth  with  the  labour  of  90  men, 
she  would  import  it  from  a  country  where  it  required  the  labour 
of  100  men  to  produce  it,  because  it  would  be  advantageous  to 
her  rather  to  employ  her  capital  in  the  production  of  wine,  for 
which  she  would  obtain  more  cloth  from  England,  than  she 
could  produce  by  diverting  a  portion  of  her  capital  from  the 
cultivation  of  vines  to  the  manufacture  of  cloth. 

Thus  England  would  give  the  produce  of  the  labour  of  100 
men  for  the  produce  of  the  labour  of  80.  Such  an  exchange 
could  not  take  place  between  the  individuals  of  the  same 
country.  The  labour  of  100  Englishmen  cannot  be  given  for 
that  of  80  Englishmen,  but  the  produce  of  the  labour  of  100 
Englishmen  may  be  given  for  the  produce  of  the  labour  of  80 


On  Foreign  Trade  83 

Portuguese,  60  Russians,  or  120  East  Indians.  The  difference 
in  this  respect,  between  a  single  country  and  many,  is  easily 
accounted  for,  by  considering  the  difficulty  with  which  capital 
moves  from  one  country  to  another,  to  seek  a  more  profitable 
employment,  and  the  activity  with  which  it  invariably  passes 
from  one  province  to  another  in  the  same  country.^ 

It  would  undoubtedly  be  advantageous  to  the  capitalists  of 
England,  and  to  the  consumers  in  both  countries,  that  under 
such  circumstances  the  wine  and  the  cloth  should  both  be 
made  in  Portugal,  and  therefore  that  the  capital  and  labour  of 
England  employed  in  making  cloth  should  be  removed  to 
Portugal  for  that  purpose.  In  that  case,  the  relative  value  of 
these  commodities  would  be  regulated  by  the  same  principle 
as  if  one  were  the  produce  of  Yorkshire  and  the  other  of  London: 
and  in  every  other  case,  if  capital  freely  flowed  towards  those 
countries  where  it  could  be  most  profitably  employed,  there 
could  be  no  difference  in  the  rate  of  profit,  and  no  other  difference 
in  the  real  or  labour  price  of  commodities  than  the  additional 
quantity  of  labour  required  to  convey  them  to  the  various 
markets  where  they  were  to  be  sold. 

Experience,  however,  shows  that  the  fancied  or  real  insecurity 
of  capital,  when  not  under  the  immediate  control  of  its  owner, 
together  with  the  natural  disinclination  which  every  man  has 
to  quit  the  country  of  his  birth  and  connections,  and  intrust 
himself,  with  all  his  habits  fixed,  to  a  strange  government  and 
new  laws,  check  the  emigration  of  capital.  These  feelings, 
which  I  should  be  sorry  to  see  weakened,  induce  most  men  of 
property  to  be  satisfied  with  a  low  rate  of  profits  in  their  own 
country,  rather  than  seek  a  more  advantageous  employment 
for  their  wealth  in  foreign  nations. 

Gold  and  silver  having  been  chosen  for  the  general  medium  of 
circulation,  they  are,  by  the  competition  of  commerce,  distri- 
buted in  such  proportions  amongst  the  different  countries  of  the 
world  as  to  accommodate  themselves  to  the  natural  traffic 

*  It  will  appear,  then,  that  a  country  possessing  very  considerable 
advantages  in  machinery  and  skill,  and  which  may  therefore  be  enabled 
to  manufacture  commodities  with  much  less  labour  than  her  neighbours, 
may,  in  return  for  such  commodities,  import  a  portion  of  the  corn  required 
for  its  consumption,  even  if  its  land  were  more  fertile  and  corn  could  be 
grown  with  less  labour  than  in  the  country  from  which  it  was  imported. 
Two  men  can  both  make  shoes  and  hats,  and  one  is  superior  to  the  other 
in  both  employments;  but  in  making  hats  he  can  only  exceed  his  com- 
petitor by  one-fifth  or  20  per  cent.,  and  in  making  shoes  he  can  excel  him 
by  one-third  or  33  per  cent.; — will  it  not  be  for  the  interest  of  both  that 
the  superior  man  should  employ  himself  exclusively  in  making  shoes,  and 
the  inferior  man  in  making  hats? 


84  Political  Economy 

which  would  take  place  if  no  such  metals  existed,  and  the  trade  ^ 
between  countries  were  purely  a  trade  of  barter.  fli 

Thus,  cloth  cannot  be  imported  into  Portugal  unless  it  sell  ^" 
there  for  more  gold  than  it  cost  in  the  country  from  which  it  was 
imported;  and  wine  cannot  be  imported  into  England  unless 
it  will  sell  for  more  there  than  it  cost  in  Portugal.  If  the  trade 
were  purely  a  trade  of  barter,  it  could  only  continue  whilst 
England  could  make  cloth  so  cheap  as  to  obtain  a  greater 
quantity  of  wine  with  a  given  quantity  of  labour  by  manu- 
facturing cloth  than  by  growing  vines;  and  also  whilst  the 
industry  of  Portugal  were  attended  by  the  reverse  effects.  Now 
suppose  England  to  discover  a  process  for  making  wine,  so  that 
it  should  become  her  interest  rather  to  grow  it  than  import  it; 
she  would  naturally  divert  a  portion  of  her  capital  from  the 
foreign  trade  to  the  home  trade ;  she  would  cease  to  manufacture 
cloth  for  exportation,  and  would  grow  wine  for  herself.  The 
money  price  of  these  commodities  would  be  regulated  accord- 
ingly; wine  would  fall  here  while  cloth  continued  at  its  former 
price,  and  in  Portugal  no  alteration  would  take  place  in  the 
price  of  either  commodity.  Cloth  would  continue  for  some 
time  to  be  exported  from  this  country,  because  its  price  would 
continue  to  be  higher  in  Portugal  than  here ;  but  money  instead 
of  wine  would  be  given  in  exchange  for  it,  till  the  accumulation 
of  money  here,  and  its  diminution  abroad,  should  so  operate 
on  the  relative  value  of  cloth  in  the  two  countries  that  it  would 
cease  to  be  profitable  to  export  it.  If  the  improvement  in 
making  wine  were  of  a  very  important  description,  it  might 
become  profitable  for  the  two  countries  to  exchange  employ- 
ments; for  England  to  make  all  the  wine,  and  Portugal  all  the 
cloth  consumed  by  them;  but  this  could  be  effected  only  by  a 
new  distribution  of  the  precious  metals,  which  should  raise  the 
price  of  cloth  in  England  and  lower  it  in  Portugal.  The 
relative  price  of  wine  would  fall  in  England  in  consequence  of 
the  real  advantage  from  the  improvement  of  its  manufacture; 
that  is  to  say,  its  natural  price  would  fall;  the  relative  price  of 
cloth  would  rise  there  from  the  accumulation  of  money. 

Thus,  suppose  before  the  improvement  in  making  wine  in 
England  the  price  of  wine  here  were  £50  per  pipe,  and  the  price 
of  a  certain  quantity  of  cloth  were  £45,  whilst  in  Portugal  the 
price  of  the  same  quantity  of  wine  was  ^^45,  and  that  of  the 
same  quantity  of  cloth  £$0;  wine  would  be  exported  from 
Portugal  with  a  profit  of  £$,  and  cloth  from  England  with  a 
profit  of  the  same  amount. 


On  Foreign  Trade  85 

Suppose  that,  after  the  improvement,  wine  falls  to  £45  in 
England,  the  cloth  continuing  at  the  same  price.  Every  trans- 
action in  commerce  is  an  independent  transaction.  Whilst 
a  merchant  can  buy  cloth  in  England  for  3^45,  and  sell  it  with 
the  usual  profit  in  Portugal,  he  will  continue  to  export  it  from 
England.  His  business  is  simply  to  purchase  English  cloth, 
and  to  pay  for  it  by  a  bill  of  exchange,  which  he  purchases  with 
Portuguese  money.  It  is  to  him  of  no  importance  what  becomes 
of  this  money:  he  has  discharged  his  debt  by  the  remittance 
of  the  bill.  His  transaction  is  undoubtedly  regulated  by  the 
terms  on  which  he  can  obtain  this  bill,  but  they  are  known  to 
him  at  the  time;  and  the  causes  which  may  influence  the 
market  price  of  bills,  or  the  rate  of  exchange,  is  no  considera- 
tion of  his. 

If  the  markets  be  favourable  for  the  exportation  of  wine  from 
Portugal  to  England,  the  exporter  of  the  wine  will  be  a  seller 
of  a  bill,  which  will  be  purchased  either  by  the  importer  of  the 
cloth,  or  by  the  person  who  sold  him  his  bill;  and  thus,  without 
the  necessity  of  money  passing  from  either  country,  the  exporters 
in  each  country  will  be  paid  for  their  goods.  Without  having 
any  direct  transaction  with  each  other,  the  money  paid  in 
Portugal  by  the  importer  of  cloth  will  be  paid  to  the  Portuguese 
exporter  of  wine;  and  in  England  by  the  negotiation  of  the 
same  bill  the  exporter  of  the  cloth  will  be  authorised  to  receive 
its  value  from  the  importer  of  wine. 

But  if  the  prices  of  wine  were  such  that  no  wine  could  be 
exported  to  England,  the  importer  of  cloth  would  equally 
purchase  a  bill;  but  the  price  of  that  bill  would  be  higher,  from 
the  knowledge  which  the  seller  of  it  would  possess  that  there 
was  no  counter  bill  in  the  market  by  which  he  could  ultimately 
settle  the  transactions  between  the  two  countries;  he  might 
know  that  the  gold  or  silver  money  which  he  received  in  exchange 
for  his  bill  must  be  actually  exported  to  his  correspondent  in 
England,  to  enable  him  to  pay  the  demand  which  he  had 
authorised  to  be  made  upon  him,  and  he  might  therefore  charge 
in  the  price  of  his  bill  all  the  expenses  to  be  incurred,  together 
with  his  fair  and  usual  profit. 

If  then  this^premium  for  a  bill  on  England  should  be  equal 
to  the  profit  on  importing  cloth,  the  importation  would  of  course 
cease;  but  if  the  premium  on  the  bill  were  only  2  per  cent.,  if  to 
be  enabled  to  pay  a  debt  in  England  of  £100,  £102  should  be  paid 
in  Portugal,  whilst  cloth  which  cost  £45  would  sell  for  £50, 
cloth  would  be  imported,  bills  would  be  bought,  and  money 


86  Political  Economy 

would  be  exported,  till  the  diminution  of  money  in  Portugal, 
and  its  accumulation  in  England,  had  produced  such  a  state 
of  prices  as  would  make  it  no  longer  profitable  to  continue  these 
transactions. 

But  the  diminution  of  money  in  one  country,  and  its  increase 
in  another,  do  not  operate  on  the  price  of  one  commodity  only, 
but  on  the  prices  of  all,  and  therefore  the  price  of  wine  and 
cloth  will  be  both  raised  in  England  and  both  lowered  in 
Portugal.  The  price  of  cloth,  from  being  £45  in  one  country 
and  £50  in  the  other,  would  probably  fall  to  ^^49  or  £48  in 
Portugal,  and  rise  to  ^^46  or  £47  in  England,  and  not  afford 
a  sufficient  profit  after  paying  a  premium  for  a  bill  to  induce 
any  merchant  to  import  that  commodity. 

It  is  thus  that  the  money  of  each  country  is  apportioned  to  it 
in  such  quantities  only  as  may  be  necessary  to  regulate  a  profit- 
able trade  of  barter.  England  exported  cloth  in  exchange  for 
wine  because,  by  so  doing,  her  industry  was  rendered  more 
productive  to  her;  she  had  more  cloth  and  wine  than  if  she  had 
manufactured  both  for  herself;  and  Portugal  imported  cloth 
and  exported  wine  because  the  industry  of  Portugal  could  be 
more  beneficially  employed  for  both  countries  in  producing 
wine.  Let  there  be  more  difficulty  in  England  in  producing 
cloth,  or  in  Portugal  in  producing  wine,  or  let  there  be  more 
facility  in  England  in  producing  wine,  or  in  Portugal  in  pro- 
ducing cloth,  and  the  trade  must  immediately  cease.  ^1 

No  change  whatever  takes  place  in  the  circumstances  of  d 
Portugal;  but  England  finds  that  she  can  employ  her  labour 
more  productively  in  the  manufacture  of  wine,  and  instantly 
the  trade  of  barter  between  the  two  countries  changes.  Not 
only  is  the  exportation  of  wine  from  Portugal  stopped,  but 
a  new  distribution  of  the  precious  metals  takes  place,  and  her  fl 
importation  of  cloth  is  also  prevented.  ™ 

Both  countries  would  probably  find  it  their  interest  to  make 
their  own  wine  and  their  own  cloth;  but  this  singular  result 
would  take  place:  in  England,  though  wine  would  be  cheaper, 
cloth  would  be  elevated  in  price,  more  would  be  paid  for  it  by 
the  consumer;  while  in  Portugal  the  consumers,  both  of  cloth 
and  of  wine,  would  be  able  to  purchase  those  commodities 
cheaper.  In  the  country  where  the  improvement  was  made 
prices  would  be  enhanced;  in  that  where  no  change  had  taken 
place,  but  where  they  had  been  deprived  of  a  profitable  branch 
of  foreign  trade,  prices  would  fall. 

This,  however,  is  only  a  seeming  advantage  to  Portugal,  for  the 


On  Foreign  Trade  87 

quantity  of  cloth  and  wine  together  produced  in  that  country- 
would  be  diminished,  while  the  quantity  produced  in  England 
would  be  increased.  Money  would  in  some  degree  have  changed 
its  value  in  the  two  countries;  it  would  be  lowered  in  England 
and  raised  in  Portugal.  Estimated  in  money,  the  whole  revenue 
of  Portugal  would  be  diminished;  estimated  in  the  same  medium 
the  whole  revenue  of  England  would  be  increased. 

Thus,  then,  it  appears  that  the  improvement  of  a  manufacture 
in  any  country  tends  to  alter  the  distribution  of  the  precious 
metals  amongst  the  nations  of  the  world:  it  tends  to  increase 
the  quantity  of  commodities,  at  the  same  time  that  it  raises 
general  prices  in  the  country  where  the  improvement  takes 
place. 

To  simplify  the  question,  I  have  been  supposing  the  trade 
between  two  countries  to  be  confined  to  two  commodities — to 
wine  and  cloth;  but  it  is  well  known  that  many  and  various 
articles  enter  into  the  list  of  exports  and  imports.  By  the 
abstraction  of  money  from  one  country,  and  the  accumulation 
of  it  in  another,  all  commodities  are  affected  in  price,  and 
consequently  encouragement  is  given  to  the  exportation  of 
many  more  commodities  besides  money,  which  will  therefore 
prevent  so  great  an  effect  from  taking  place  on  the  value  of 
money  in  the  two  countries  as  might  otherwise  be  expected. 

Beside  the  improvements  in  arts  and  machinery,  there  are 
various  other  causes  which  are  constantly  operating  on  the 
natural  course  of  trade,  and  which  interfere  with  the  equilibrium 
and  the  relative  value  of  money.  Bounties  on  exportation  or 
importation,  new  taxes  on  commodities,  sometimes  by  their 
direct,  and  at  other  times  by  their  indirect  operation,  disturb 
the  natural  trade  of  barter,  and  produce  a  consequent  necessity 
of  importing  or  exporting  money,  in  order  that  prices  may  be 
accommodated  to  the  natural  course  of  commerce;  and  this 
effect  is  produced  not  only  in  the  country  where  the  disturbing 
cause  takes  place,  but,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  in  every 
country  of  the  commercial  world. 

This  will  in  some  measure  account  for  the  different  value  of 
money  in  different  countries ;  it  will  explain  to  us  why  the  prices 
of  home  commodities,  and  those  of  great  bulk,  though  of  com- 
paratively small  value,  are,  independently  of  other  causes, 
higher  in  those  countries  where  manufactures  flourish.  Of  two 
countries  having  precisely  the  same  population,  and  the  same 
quantity  of  land  of  equal  fertility  in  cultivation,  with  the  same 
knowledge  too  of  agriculture,  the  prices  of  raw  produce  will  be 


88  Political  Economy 

highest  in  that  where  the  greater  skill  and  the  better  machinery 
is  used  in  the  manufacture  of  exportable  commodities.  The 
rate  of  profits  will  probably  differ  but  little;  for  wages,  or  the 
real  reward  of  the  labourer,  may  be  the  same  in  both ;  but  those 
wages,  as  well  as  raw  produce,  will  be  rated  higher  in  money 
in  that  country,  into  which,  from  the  advantages  attending  their 
skill  and  machinery,  an  abundance  of  money  is  imported  in 
exchange  for  their  goods. 

Of  these  two  countries,  if  one  had  the  advantage  in  the  manu- 
facture of  goods  of  one  quality,  and  the  other  in  the  manufacture 
of  goods  of  another  quality,  there  would  be  no  decided  influx  of 
the  precious  metals  into  either;  but  if  the  advantage  very 
heavily  preponderated  in  favour  of  either,  that  effect  would  be 
inevitable. 

In  the  former  part  of  this  work,  we  have  assumed,  for  the 
purpose  of  argument,  that  money  always  continued  of  the 
same  value;  we  are  now  endeavouring  to  show  that,  besides 
the  ordinary  variations  in  the  value  of  money,  and  those  which 
are  common  to  the  whole  commercial  world,  there  are  also 
partial  variations  to  which  money  is  subject  in  particular 
countries;  and  to  the  fact  that  the  value  of  money  is  never 
the  same  in  any  two  countries,  depending  as  it  does  on  relative 
taxation,  on  manufacturing  skill,  on  the  advantages  of  climate, 
natural  productions,  and  many  other  causes. 

Although,  however,  money  is  subject  to  such  perpetual 
variations,  and  consequently  the  prices  of  the  commodities 
which  are  common  to  most  countries  are  also  subject  to  con- 
siderable difference,  yet  no  effect  will  be  produced  on  the  rate 
of  profits,  either  from  the  influx  or  efflux  of  money.  Capital 
will  not  be  increased  because  the  circulating  medium  is  aug- 
mented. If  the  rent  paid  by  the  farmer  to  his  landlord,  and 
the  wages  to  his  labourers,  be  20  per  cent,  higher  in  one  country' 
than  another,  and  if  at  the  same  time  the  nominal  value  of  the 
farmer's  capital  be  20  per  cent,  more,  he  will  receive  precisely 
the  same  rate  of  profits,  although  he  should  sell  his  raw  produce 
20  per  cent,  higher. 

Profits,  it  cannot  be  too  often  repeated,  depend  on  wages ;  not 
on  nominal,  but  real  wages ;  not  on  the  number  of  pounds  that 
may  be  annually  paid  to  the  labourer,  but  on  the  number  of 
days'  work  necessary  to  obtain  those  pounds.  Wages  may 
therefore  be  precisely  the  same  in  two  countries ;  they  may  bear, 
too,  the  same  proportion  to  rent,  and  to  the  whole  produce 
obtained  from  the  land,  although  in  one  of  those  countries  the 


I 
I 


On  Foreign  Trade  89 

labourer  should  receive  ten  shillings  per  week  and  in  the  other 
twelve. 

In  the  early  states  of  society,  when  manufactures  have  made 
little  progress,  and  the  produce  of  all  countries  is  nearly  similar, 
consisting  of  the  bulky  and  most  useful  commodities,  the  value 
of  money  in  different  countries  will  be  chiefly  regulated  by  their 
distance  from  the  mines  which  supply  the  precious  metals ;  but 
as  the  arts  and  improvements  of  society  advance,  and  different 
nations  excel  in  particular  manufactures,  although  distance  will 
still  enter  into  the  calculation,  the  value  of  the  precious  metals 
will  be  chiefly  regulated  by  the  superiority  of  those  manufactures. 

Suppose  all  nations  to  produce  com,  cattle,  and  coarse  clothing 
only,  and  that  it  was  by  the  exportation  of  such  commodities 
that  gold  could  be  obtained  from  the  countries  which  produced 
them,  or  from  those  who  held  them  in  subjection;  gold  would 
naturally  be  of  greater  exchangeable  value  in  Poland  than  in 
England,  on  account  of  the  greater  expense  of  sending  such 
a  bulky  commodity  as  com  the  more  distant  voyage,  and  also 
the  greater  expense  attending  the  conveying  of  gold  to  Poland. 

This  difference  in  the  value  of  gold,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing, 
this  difference  in  the  price  of  corn  in  the  two  countries,  would 
exist,  although  the  facilities  of  producing  com  in  England  should 
far  exceed  those  of  Poland,  from  the  greater  fertility  of  the  land 
and  the  superiority  in  the  skill  and  implements  of  the  labourer. 

If,  however,  Poland  should  be  the  first  to  improve  her  manu- 
factures, if  she  should  succeed  in  making  a  commodity  which 
was  generally  desirable,  including  great  value  in  little  bulk, 
or  if  she  should  be  exclusively  blessed  with  some  natural  pro- 
duction, generally  desirable,  and  not  possessed  by  other  countries, 
she  would  obtain  an  additional  quantity  of  gold  in  exchange 
for  this  commodity,  which  would  operate  on  the  price  of  her 
com,  cattle,  and  coarse  clothing.  The  disadvantage  of  distance 
would  probably  be  more  than  compensated  by  the  advantage 
of  having  an  exportable  commodity  of  great  value,  and  money 
would  be  permanently  of  lower  value  in  Poland  than  in  England. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  the  advantage  of  skill  and  machinery  were 
possessed  by  England,  another  reason  would  be  added  to  that 
which  before  existed  why  gold  should  be  less  valuable  in  Eng- 
land than  in  Poland,  and  why  corn,  cattle,  and  clothing  should 
be  at  a  higher  price  in  the  former  country. 

These  I  believe  to  be  the  only  two  causes  which  regulate  the 
comparative  value  of  money  in  the  different  countries  of  the 
world;    for  although  taxation  occasions  a  disturbance  of  the 


go  Political  Economy 

equilibrium  of  money,  it  does  so  by  depriving  the  countiy  in 
which  it  is  imposed  of  some  of  the  advantages  attending  skill, 
industry,  and  climate. 

It  has  been  my  endeavour  carefully  to  distinguish  between 
a  low  value  of  money  and  a  high  value  of  com,  or  any  other 
commodity  with  which  money  may  be  compared.  These  have 
been  generally  considered  as  meaning  the  same  thing;  but  it  is 
evident  that  when  com  rises  from  five  to  ten  shillings  a  bushel, 
it  may  be  owing  either  to  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money  or  to  a  rise 
in  the  value  of  com.  Thus  we  have  seen  that,  from  the  necessity 
of  having  recourse  successively  to  land  of  a  worse  and  worse 
quality,  in  order  to  feed  an  increasing  population,  com  must  rise 
in  relative  value  to  other  things.  If  therefore  money  continue 
permanently  of  the  same  value,  corn  will  exchange  for  more  of 
such  money,  that  is  to  say,  it  will  rise  in  price.  The  same  rise 
in  the  price  of  com  will  be  produced  by  such  improvement  of 
machinery  in  manufactures  as  shall  enable  us  to  manufacture 
commodities  with  peculiar  advantages :  for  the  influx  of  money 
will  be  the  consequence;  it  will  fall  in  value,  and  therefore 
exchange  for  less  com.  But  the  effects  resulting  from  a  high 
price  of  com  when  produced  by  the  rise  in  the  value  of  corn, 
and  when  caused  by  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money,  are  totally 
different.  In  both  cases  the  money  price  of  wages  will  rise,  but 
if  it  be  in  consequence  of  the  fall  in  the  value  of  money,  not  only 
wages  and  com,  but  all  other  commodities  will  rise.  If  the 
manufacturer  has  more  to  pay  for  wages  he  will  receive  more 
for  his  manufactured  goods,  and  the  rate  of  profits  will  remain 
unaffected.  But  when  the  rise  in  the  price  of  corn  is  the  effect 
of  the  difficulty  of  production,  profits  will  fall;  for  the  manu- 
facturer will  be  obliged  to  pay  more  wages,  and  will  not  be 
enabled  to  remunerate  himself  by  raising  the  price  of  his  manu- 
factured commodity. 

Any  improvement  in  the  facility  of  working  the  mines,  by 
which  the  precious  metals  may  be  produced  with  a  less  quantity 
of  labour,  will  sink  the  value  of  money  generally.  It  will  then 
exchange  for  fewer  commodities  in  all  countries ;  but  when  any 
particular  country  excels  in  manufactures,  so  as  to  occasion  an 
influx  of  money  towards  it,  the  value  of  money  will  be  lower, 
and  the  prices  of  com  and  labour  will  be  relatively  higher  in  that 
country  than  in  any  other. 

This  higher  value  of  money  will  not  be  indicated  by  the 
exchange;  bills  may  continue  to  be  negotiated  at  par,  although 
the  prices  of  com  and  labour  should  be  lo,  20,  or  30  per  cent. 


On  Foreign  Trade  91 

higher  in  one  country  than  another.  Under  the  circumstances 
supposed,  such  a  difference  of  prices  is  the  natural  order  of  things, 
and  the  exchange  can  only  be  at  par  when  a  sufficient  quantity 
of  money  is  introduced  into  th^  country  excelling  in  manu- 
factures, so  as  to  raise  the  price  of  its  corn  and  labour.  If 
foreign  countries  should  prohibit  the  exportation  of  money, 
and  could  successfully  enforce  obedience  to  such  a  law,  they 
might  indeed  prevent  the  rise  in  the  prices  of  the  corn  and  labour 
of  the  manufacturing  country;  for  such  rise  can  only  take  place 
after  the  influx  of  the  precious  metals,  supposing  paper  money 
not  to  be  used;  but  they  could  not  prevent  the  exchange  from 
being  very  unfavourable  to  them.  If  England  were  the  manu- 
facturing country,  and  it  were  possible  to  prevent  the  importa- 
tion of  money,  the  exchange  with  France,  Holland,  and  Spain 
might  be  5,  10,  or  20  per  cent,  against  those  countries. 

Whenever  the  current  of  money  is  forcibly  stopped,  and  when 
money  is  prevented  from  settling  at  its  just  level,  there  are  no 
limits  to  the  possible  variations  of  the  exchange.  The  effects 
are  similar  to  those  which  follow  when  a  paper  money,  not 
exchangeable  for  specie  at  the  will  of  the  holder,  is  forced  into 
circulation.  Such  a  currency  is  necessarily  confined  to  the 
country  where  it  is  issued :  it  cannot,  when  too  abundant,  diffuse 
itself  generally  amongst  other  countries.  The  level  of  circula- 
tion is  destroyed,  and  the  exchange  will  inevitably  be  unfavour- 
able to  the  country  where  it  is  excessive  in  quantity:  just  so 
would  be  the  effects  of  a  metallic  circulation  if  by  forcible 
means,  by  laws  which  could  not  be  evaded,  money  should  be 
detained  in  a  country,  when  the  stream  of  trade  gave  it  an 
impetus  towards  other  countries. 

When  each  country  has  precisely  the  quantity  of  money 
which  it  ought  to  have,  money  will  not  indeed  be  of  the  same 
value  in  each,  for  with  respect  to  many  commodities  it  may 
differ  5,  lo,  or  even  20  per  cent.,  but  the  exchange  will  be  at 
par.  One  hundred  pounds  in  England,  or  the  silver  which  is 
in  £100,  will  purchase  a  bill  of  £100,  or  an  equal  quantity  of 
silver  in  France,  Spain,  or  Holland. 

In  speaking  of  the  exchange  and  the  comparative  value  of 
money  in  different  countries,  we  must  not  in  the  least  refer  to 
the  value  of  money  estimated  in  commodities  in  either  countr)^ 
The  exchange  is  never  ascertained  by  estimating  the  compara- 
tive value  of  money  in  com,  cloth,  or  any  commodity  whatever, 
but  by  estimating  the  value  of  the  currency  of  one  country  in 
the  currency  of  another. 


92  Political  Economy 

It  may  also  be  ascertained  by  comparing  it  with  some  standard 
common  to  both  countries.  If  a  bill  on  England  for  £ioo  will 
purchase  the  same  quantity  of  goods  in  France  or  Spain  that 
a  bill  on  Hamburgh  for  the  same  sum  will  do,  the  exchange 
between  Hamburgh  and  England  is  at  par;  but  if  a  bill  on 
England  for  £130  will  purchase  no  more  than  a  bill  on  Hamburgh 
for  £100,  the  exchange  is  30  per  cent,  against  England. 

In  England  £100  may  purchase  a  bill,  or  the  right  of  receiving 
£101  in  Holland,  £102  in  France,  and  £105  in  Spain.  The 
exchange  with  England  is,  in  that  case,  said  to  be  i  per  cent, 
against  Holland,  2  per  cent,  against  France,  and  5  per  cent, 
against  Spain.  It  indicates  that  the  level  of  currency  is  higher 
than  it  should  be  in  those  countries,  and  the  comparative  value 
of  their  currencies,  and  that  of  England,  would  be  immediately 
restored  to  par  by  extracting  from  theirs  or  by  adding  to  that 
of  England. 

Those  who  maintain  that  our  currency  was  depreciated  during 
the  last  ten  years,  when  the  exchange  varied  from  20  to  30  per 
cent,  against  this  country,  have  never  contended,  as  they  have 
been  accused  of  doing,  that  money  could  not  be  more  valuable 
in  one  country  than  another  as  compared  with  various  com- 
modities; but  they  did  contend  that  £130  could  not  be  detained 
in  England  unless  it  was  depreciated,  when  it  was  of  no  more 
value,  estimated  in  the  money  of  Hamburgh  or  of  Holland, 
than  the  bullion  in  £100. 

By  sending  130  good  English  pounds  sterling  to  Hamburgh, 
even  at  an  expense  of  £5,  I  should  be  possessed  there  of  £125; 
what  then  could  make  me  consent  to  give  £130  for  a  bill  which 
would  give  me  £100  in  Hamburgh,  but  that  my  pounds  were 
not  good  pounds  sterling?  —  they  were  deteriorated,  were 
degraded  in  intrinsic  value  below  the  pounds  sterling  of  Ham- 
burgh, and  if  actually  sent  there,  at  an  expense  of  £5,  would 
sell  only  for  £100.  With  metallic  pounds  sterling,  it  is  not 
denied  that  my  £130  would  procure  me  £125  in  Hamburgh,  but 
with  paper  pounds  sterling  I  can  only  obtain  £100;  and  yet  it 
was  maintained  that  £130  in  paper  was  of  equal  value  with 
£130  in  silver  or  gold. 

Some  indeed  more  reasonably  maintained  that  £130  in  paper 
was  not  of  equal  value  with  £130  in  metallic  money;  but  they 
said  that  it  was  the  metallic  money  which  had  changed  its 
value  and  not  the  paper  money.  They  wished  to  confine  the 
meaning  of  the  word  depreciation  to  an  actual  fall  of  value,  and 
not  to  a  comparative  difference  between  the  value  of  money 


On  Foreign  Trade  93 

and  the  standard  by  which  by  law  it  is  regulated.  One  hundred 
pounds  of  English  money  was  formerly  of  equal  value  with  and 
could  purchase  £100  of  Hamburgh  money:  in  any  other  country 
a  bill  of  £100  on  England,  or  on  Hamburgh,  could  purchase 
precisely  the  same  quantity  of  commodities.  To  obtain  the 
same  things,  I  was  lately  obliged  to  give  £130  English  money, 
when  Hamburgh  could  obtain  them  for  £100  Hamburgh  money. 
If  English  money  was  of  the  same  value  then  as  before,  Ham- 
burgh money  must  have  risen  in  value.  But  where  is  the  proof 
of  this?  How  is  it  to  be  ascertained  whether  English  money 
has  fallen  or  Hamburgh  money  has  risen  ?  there  is  no  standard 
by  which  this  can  be  determined.  It  is  a  plea  which  admits  of 
no  proof,  and  can  neither  be  positively  affirmed  nor  positively 
contradicted.  The  nations  of  the  world  must  have  been  early 
convinced  that  there  was  no  standard  of  value  in  nature  to 
which  they  might  unerringly  refer,  and  therefore  chose  a  medium 
which  on  the  whole  appeared  to  them  less  variable  than  any 
other  commodity. 

To  this  standard  we  must  conform  till  the  law  is  changed,  and 
till  some  other  commodity  is  discovered  by  the  use  of  which 
we  shall  obtain  a  more  perfect  standard  than  that  which  we 
have  established.  While  gold  is  exclusively  the  standard  in 
this  country  money  will  be  depreciated  when  a  pound  sterling 
is  not  of  equal  value  with  5  dwts.  and  3  grs.  of  standard  gold, 
and  that  whether  gold  rises  or  falls  in  general  value. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


ON  TAXES 


Taxes  are  a  portion  of  the  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of 
a  country  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  government;  and  are 
always  ultimately  paid  either  from  the  capital  or  from  the 
revenue  of  the  country. 

We  have  already  shown  how  the  capital  of  a  country  is  either 
fixed  or  circulating,  according  as  it  is  of  a  more  or  of  a  less 
durable  nature.  It  is  difficult  to  define  strictly  where  the 
distinction  between  circulating  and  fixed  capital  begins;  for 
there  are  almost  infinite  degrees  in  the  durability  of  capital. 
The  food  of  a  country  is  consumed  and  reproduced  at  least  once 
in  every  year,  the  clothing  of  the  labourer  is  probably  not 
consumed  and  reproduced  in  less  than  two  years;  whilst  his 
house  and  furniture  are  calculated  to  endure  for  a  period  of 
ten  or  twenty  years. 

When  the  annual  productions  of  a  country  more  than  replace 
its  annual  consumption,  it  is  said  to  increase  its  capital;  when 
its  annual  consumption  is  not  at  least  replaced  by  its  annual 
production,  it  is  said  to  diminish  its  capital.  Capital  may 
therefore  be  increased  by  an  increased  production,  or  by  a 
diminished  unproductive  consumption. 

If  the  consumption  of  the  government  when  increased  by 
the  levy  of  additional  taxes  be  met  either  by  an  increased 
production  or  by  a  diminished  consumption  on  the  part  of  the 
people,  the  taxes  will  fall  upon  revenue,  and  the  national  capital 
will  remain  unimpaired;  but  if  there  be  no  increased  production 
or  diminished  unproductive  consumption  on  the  part  of  the 
people,  the  taxes  will  necessarily  fall  on  capital,  that  is  to  say, 
they  will  impair  the  fund  allotted  to  productive  consumption.^ 

^  It  must  be  understood  that  all  the  productions  of  a  country  are 
consumed;  but  it  makes  the  greatest  difference  imaginable  whether  they 
are  consumed  by  those  who  reproduce  or  by  those  who  do  not  reproduce 
another  value.  When  we  say  that  revenue  is  saved  and  added  to  capital, 
what  we  mean  is,  that  the  portion  of  revenue,  so  said  to  be  added  to  capital, 
is  consumed  by  productive  instead  of  unproductive  labourers.  There  can 
be  no  greater  error  than  in  supposing  that  capital  is  increased  by  non- 
consumption.     If  the  price  of  labour  should  rise  so  high  that,  notwith- 

94 


On  Taxes  95 

In  proportion  as  the  capital  of  a  country  is  diminished,  its 
productions  will  be  necessarily  diminished;  and,  therefore,  if 
the  same  unproductive  expenditure  on  the  part  of  the  people 
and  of  the  government  continue,  with  a  constantly  diminishing 
annual  reproduction,  the  resources  of  the  people  and  the  state 
will  fall  away  with  increasing  rapidity,  and  distress  and  ruin 
will  follow. 

Notwithstanding  the  immense  expenditure  of  the  English 
government  during  the  last  twenty  years,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  but  that  the  increased  production  on  the  part  of  the 
people  has  more  than  compensated  for  it.  The  national  capital 
has  not  merely  been  unimpaired,  it  has  been  greatly  increased, 
and  the  annual  revenue  of  the  people,  even  after  the  payment  of 
their  taxes,  is  probably  greater  at  the  present  time  than  at  any 
former  period  of  our  history. 

For  the  proof  of  this,  we  might  refer  to  the  increase  of  popu- 
lation—  to  the  extension  of  agriculture  —  to  the  increase  of 
shipping  and  manufactures — to  the  building  of  docks — to  the 
opening  of  numerous  canals,  as  well  as  to  many  other  expensive 
undertakings;  all  denoting  an  increase  both  of  capital  and  of 
annual  production. 

Still,  however,  it  is  certain  that,  but  for  taxation,  this  increase 
of  capital  would  have  been  much  greater.  There  are  no  taxes 
which  have  not  a  tendency  to  lessen  the  power  to  accumulate. 
All  taxes  must  either  fall  on  capital  or  revenue.  If  they  en- 
croach on  capital,  they  must  proportionably  diminish  that  fund 
by  whose  extent  the  extent  of  the  productive  industry  of  the 
country  must  always  be  regulated;  and  if  they  fall  on  revenue, 
they  must  either  lessen  accumulation,  or  force  the  contributors 
to  save  the  amount  of  the  tax,  by  making  a  corresponding 
diminution  of  their  former  unproductive  consumption  of  the 
necessaries  and  luxuries  of  life.  Some  taxes  will  produce  these 
effects  in  a  much  greater  degree  than  others;  but  the  great  evil 
of  taxation  is  to  be  found,  not  so  much  in  any  selection  of  its 
objects,  as  in  the  general  amount  of  its  effects  taken  collectively. 

Taxes  are  not  necessarily  taxes  on  capital  because  they  are 
laid  on  capital ;  nor  on  income  because  they  are  laid  on  income. 
If  from  my  income  of  £1000  per  annum  I  am  required  to  pay 
£100,  it  will  really  be  a  tax  on  my  income  should  I  be  content 
with  the  expenditure  of  the  remaining  £900;  but  it  will  be  a 
tax  on  capital  if  I  continue  to  spend  £1000. 

standing  the  increase  of  capital,  no  more  could  be  employed,  I  should 
say  that  such  increase  of  capital  would  be  still  unproductive!  y  consumed. 


96  Political  Economy 

The  capital  from  which  my  income  of  £1000  is  derived  may 
be  of  the  value  of  £10,000;  a  tax  of  one  per  cent,  on  such  capital 
would  be  £100;  but  my  capital  would  be  unaffected  if,  after 
paying  this  tax,  I  in  like  manner  contented  myself  with  the 
expenditure  of  £900. 

The  desire  which  every  man  has  to  keep  his  station  in  life, 
and  to  maintain  his  wealth  at  the  height  which  it  has  once 
attained,  occasions  most  taxes,  whether  laid  on  capital  or  on 
income,  to  be  paid  from  income;  and,  therefore,  as  taxation 
proceeds,  or  as  government  increases  its  expenditure,  the  annual 
enjoyments  of  the  people  must  be  diminished,  unless  they  are 
enabled  proportionally  to  increase  their  capitals  and  income. 
It  should  be  the  policy  of  governments  to  encourage  a  disposi- 
tion to  do  this  in  the  people,  and  never  to  lay  such  taxes  as  will 
inevitably  fall  on  capital;  since,  by  so  doing,  they  impair  the 
funds  for  the  maintenance  of  labour,  and  thereby  diminish  the 
future  production  of  the  country. 

In  England  this  policy  has  been  neglected  in  taxing  the  pro- 
bates of  wills,  in  the  legacy  duty,  and  in  all  taxes  affecting  the 
transference  of  property  from  the  dead  to  the  living.  If  a 
legacy  of  £1000  be  subject  to  a  tax  of  £100,  the  legatee  con- 
siders his  legacy  as  only  £900  and  feels  no  particular  motive  to 
save  the  £100  duty  from  his  expenditure,  and  thus  the  capital 
of  the  country  is  diminished;  but  if  he  had  really  received 
£1000,  and  had  been  required  to  pay  £100  as  a  tax  on  income, 
on  wine,  on  horses,  or  on  servants,  he  would  probably  have 
diminished,  or  rather  not  increased  his  expenditure  by  that 
sum,  and  the  capital  of  the  country  would  have  been  unimpaired. 

*'  Taxes  upon  the  transference  of  property  from  the  dead  to 
the  living,"  says  Adam  Smith,  "  fall  finally,  as  well  as  imme- 
diately, upon  the  persons  to  whom  the  property  is  transferred. 
Taxes  on  the  sale  of  land  fall  altogether  upon  the  seller.  The 
seller  is  almost  always  under  the  necessity  of  selling,  and  must, 
therefore,  take  such  a  price  as  he  can  get.  The  buyer  is  scarce 
ever  under  the  necessity  of  buying,  and  Will,  therefore,  only  give 
such  a  price  as  he  likes.  He  considers  what  the  land  will  cost 
him  in  tax  and  price  together.  The  more  he  is  obliged  to  pay 
in  the  way  of  tax,  the  less  he  will  be  disposed  to  give  in  the  way 
of  price.  Such  taxes,  therefore,  fall  almost  always  upon  a 
necessitous  person,  and  must,  therefore,  be  very  cruel  and 
oppressive."  "  Stamp  duties,  and  duties  upon  the  registration 
of  bonds  and  contracts  for  borrowed  money,  fall  altogether  upon 
the  borrower,  and  in  fact  are  always  paid  by  him.    Duties  of 


On  Taxes  97 

the  same  kind  upon  law  proceedings  fall  upon  the  suitors.  They 
reduce  to  both  the  capital  value  of  the  subject  in  dispute.  The 
more  it  costs  to  acquire  any  property,  the  less  must  be  the  net 
value  of  it  when  acquired.  All  taxes  upon  the  transference  of 
property  of  every  kind,  so  far  as  they  diminish  the  capital  value 
of  that  property,  tend  to  diminish  the  funds  destined  for  the 
maintenance  of  labour.  They  are  all  more  or  less  unthrifty 
taxes  that  increase  the  revenue  of  the  sovereign,  which  seldom 
maintains  any  but  unproductive  labourers,  at  the  expense  of 
the  capital  of  the  people,  which  maintains  none  but  productive." 
But  this  is  not  the  only  objection  to  taxes  on  the  transference 
of  property;  they  prevent  the  national  capital  from  being 
distributed  in  the  way  most  beneficial  to  the  community.  For 
the  general  prosperity  there  cannot  be  too  much  facility  given 
to  the  conveyance  and  exchange  of  all  kinds  of  property,  as  it 
is  by  such  means  that  capital  of  every  species  is  likely  to  find  its 
way  into  the  hands  of  those  who  will  best  employ  it  in  increasing 
the  productions  of  the  country.  "  Why,"  asks  M.  Say,  "  does 
an  individual  wish  to  sell  his  land  ?  it  is  because  he  has  another 
employment  in  view  in  which  his  funds  will  be  more  productive. 
Why  does  another  wish  to  purchase  this  same  land.?  it  is  to 
employ  a  capital  which  brings  him  in  too  little,  which  was 
unemployed,  or  the  use  of  which  he  thinks  susceptible  of  im- 
provement. This  exchange  will  increase  the  general  income, 
since  it  increases  the  income  of  these  parties.  But  if  the  charges 
are  so  exorbitant  as  to  prevent  the  exchange,  they  are  an 
obstacle  to  this  increase  of  the  general  income."  Those  taxes, 
however,  are  easily  collected ;  and  this  by  many  may  be  thought 
to  afford  some  compensation  for  their  injurious  effects. 


CHAPTER  IX 

TAXES   ON   RAW   PRODUCE 


1 


Having  in  a  former  part  of  this  work  established,  I  hope  satis- 
factorily, the  principle  that  the  price  of  corn  is  regulated  by 
the  cost  of  its  production  on  that  land  exclusively,  or  rather 
with  that  capital  exclusively,  which  pays  no  rftnt,  it  will  follow 
that  whatever  may  increase  the  cost  of  production  will  increase 
the  price;  whatever  may  reduce  it  will  lower  the  price.  The 
necessity  of  cultivating  poorer  land,  or  of  obtaining  a  less  return 
with  a  given  additional  capital  on  land  already  in  cultivation, 
will  inevitably  raise  the  exchangeable  value  of  raw  produce. 
The  discovery  of  machinery,  which  will  enable  the  cultivator 
to  obtain  his  corn  at  a  less  cost  of  production,  will  necessarily 
lower  its  exchangeable  value.  Any  tax  which  may  be  imposed 
on  the  cultivator,  whether  in  the  shape  of  land-tax,  tithes,  or 
a  tax  on  the  produce  when  obtained,  will  increase  the  cost  of 
production,  and  will  therefore  raise  the  price  of  raw  produce. 

If  the  price  of  raw  produce  did  not  rise  so  as  to  compensate 
the  cultivator  for  the  tax,  he  would  naturally  quit  a  trade 
where  his  profits  were  reduced  below  the  general  level  of  profits; 
this  would  occasion  a  diminution  of  supply,  until  the  unabated 
demand  should  have  produced  such  a  rise  in  the  price  of  raw 
produce  as  to  make  the  cultivation  of  it  equally  profitable  with 
the  investment  of  capital  in  any  other  trade. 

A  rise  of  price  is  the  only  means  by  which  he  could  pay  the 
tax,  and  continue  to  derive  the  usual  and  general  profits  from 
this  employment  of  his  capital.  He  could  not  deduct  the  tax 
from  his  rent,  and  oblige  his  landlord  to  pay  it,  for  he  pays  no 
rent.  He  would  not  deduct  it  from  his  profits,  for  there  is  no 
reason  why  he  should  continue  in  an  employment  which  yields 
small  profits,  when  all  other  employments  are  yielding  greater. 
There  can  then  be  no  question  but  that  he  will  have  the  power 
of  raising  the  price  of  raw  produce  by  a  sum  equal  to  the  tax. 

A  tax  on  raw  produce  would  not  be  paid  by  the  landlord;  it 
would  not  be  paid  by  the  farmer;  but  it  would  be  paid,  in  an 
increased  price,  by  the  consumer. 

Rent,  it  should  be  remembered,  is  the  difference  between  the 

98 


Taxes  on  Raw  Produce  99 

produce  obtained  by  equal  portions  of  labour  and  capital 
employed  on  land  of  the  same  or  different  qualities.  It  should 
be  remembered,  too,  that  the  money  rent  of  land,  and  the  corn 
rent  of  land,  do  not  vary  in  the  same  proportion. 

In  the  case  of  a  tax  on  raw  produce,  of  a  land-tax,  or  tithes, 
the  com  rent  of  land  will  vary,  while  the  money  rent  will  remain 
as  before. 

If,  as  we  have  before  supposed,  the  land  in  cultivation  were 
of  three  qualities,  and  that  with  an  equal  amount  of  capital, 
180  qrs.  of  com  were  obtained  from  land  No.  i 
170       .         .         .     from     ...       2 
160       .         .         .     from     ...       3 
the  rent  of  No.  i  would  be  20  quarters,  the  difference  between 
that  of  No.  3  and  No.  i ;   and  of  No.  2,  10  quarters,  the  differ- 
ence between  that  of  No.  3  and  No.  2;  while  No.  3  would  pay 
no  rent  whatever. 

Now,  if  the  price  of  com  were  £4  per  quarter,  the  money  rent 
of  No.  I  would  be  £80,  and  that  of  No.  2,  £40. 

Suppose  a  tax  of  Ss.  per  quarter  to  be  imposed  on  corn;  then 
the  price  would  rise  to  £4  Ss. ;  and  if  the  landlords  obtained  the 
same  corn  rent  as  before,  the  rent  of  No.  i  would  be  £88  and 
that  of  No.  2,  £44.  But  they  would  not  obtain  the  same  com 
rent;  the  tax  would  fall  heavier  on  No.  i  than  on  No.  2,  and  on 
No.  2  than  on  No.  3,  because  it  would  be  levied  on  a  greater 
quantity  of  com.  It  is  the  difficulty  of  production  on  No.  3 
which  regulates  price;  and  corn  rises  to  £4  Ss.,  that  the  profits 
of  the  capital  employed  on  No.  3  may  be  on  a  level  with  the 
general  profits  of  stock. 

The  produce  and  tax  on  the  three  qualities  of  land  will  be  as 
follows: 

No.  I,  yielding    180     qrs.  at  £4  8s.  per  qr.  ,       £792 

Deduct  the  value  of     16.3  or  8s.  per  qr.  on  180  qrs.      .  72 

Net  corn  produce    163.7  Net  money  produce       jC72o 

No.  2,  yielding    170     qrs.  at  £4.  Ss.  per  qr.         .       £748 
Deduct  the  value  of  ^.  {  ^"  '' J^r' ^\%%r  }       ^ 

Net  corn  produce    154.6  Net  money  produce       £680 

No.  3,  yielding   160     qrs.  at  £4  85.      .  .  .       /704 

Deduct  the  value  of     14.5  {  ^^^-  \i^^lZ  ^''  ^""  }  ^4 

Net  com  produce  145.5  Net  money  produce      £640 


lOO  Political  Economy 

The  money  rent  of  No.  i  would  continue  to  be  £80,  or  the 
difference  between  £640  and  £720;  and  that  of  No.  2,  £40,  or 
the  difference  between  £640  and  £680,  precisely  the  same  as 
before;  but  the  com  rent  will  be  reduced  from  20  quarters  on 
No.  I,  to  i8.2  quarters,  the  difference  between  145.5  ^^^  163.7 
quarters,  and  that  on  No.  2  from  10  to  9.1  quarters,  the  differ- 
ence between  145.5  and  154.6  quarters. 

A  tax  on  com,  then,  would  fall  on  the  consumers  of  com,  and 
would  raise  its  value,  as  compared  with  all  other  commodities, 
in  a  degree  proportioned  to  the  tax.  In  proportion  as  raw 
produce  entered  into  the  composition  of  other  commodities 
would  their  value  also  be  raised,  unless  the  tax  were  counter- 
vailed by  other  causes.  They  would  in  fact  be  indirectly  taxed, 
and  their  value  would  rise  in  proportion  to  the  tax. 

A  tax,  however,  on  raw  produce,  and  on  the  necessaries  of  the 
labourer,  would  have  another  effect  —  it  would  raise  wages. 
From  the  effect  of  the  principle  of  population  on  the  increase 
of  mankind,  wages  of  the  lowest  kind  never  continue  much 
above  that  rate  which  nature  and  habit  demand  for  the  support 
of  the  labourers.  This  class  is  never  able  to  bear  any  consider- 
able proportion  of  taxation;  and,  consequently,  if  they  had  to 
pay  Ss.  per  quarter  in  addition  for  wheat,  and  in  some  smaller 
proportion  for  other  necessaries,  they  would  not  be  able  to  sub- 
sist on  the  same  wages  as  before,  and  to  keep  up  the  race  of 
labourers.  Wages  would  inevitably  and  necessarily  rise;  and, 
in  proportion  as  they  rose,  profits  would  fall.  Government 
would  receive  a  tax  of  85.  per  quarter  on  all  the  corn  consumed 
in  the  country,  a  part  of  which  would  be  paid  directly  by  the 
consumers  of  coin;  the  other  part  would  be  paid  indirectly  by 
those  who  employed  labour,  and  would  affect  profits  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  wages  had  been  raised  from  the  increased  demand 
for  labour  compared  with  the  supply,  or  from  an  increasing 
difficulty  of  obtaining  the  food  and  necessaries  required  by  the 
labourer. 

In  as  far  as  the  tax  might  affect  consumers  it  would  be  an 
equal  tax,  but  in  as  far  as  it  would  affect  profits  it  would  be 
a  partial  tax;  for  it  would  neither  operate  on  the  landlord  nor 
on  the  stockholder,  since  they  would  continue  to  receive,  the 
one  the  same  money  rent,  the  other  the  same  money  dividends 
as  before.  A  tax  on  the  produce  of  the  land  then  would  operate 
as  follows: — 

I  St,  It  would  raise  the  price  of  raw  produce  by  a  sum  equal  to 


Taxes  on  Raw  Produce  loi 

the  tax,  and  would  therefore  fall  on  each  consumer  in 
proportion  to  his  consumption. 
2nd,  It  would  raise  the  wages  of  labour,  and  lower  profits. 

It  may  then  be  objected  against  such  a  tax, 

ist,  That  by  raising  the  wages  of  labour,  and  lowering  profits, 
it  is  an  unequal  tax,  as  affects  the  income  of  the  farmer, 
trader,  and  manufacturer,  and  leaves  untaxed  the 
income  of  the  landlord,  stockholder,  and  others  enjoy- 
ing fixed  incomes. 

2nd,  That  there  would  be  a  considerable  interval  between  the 
rise  in  the  price  of  corn  and  the  rise  of  wages,  during 
which  much  distress  would  be  experienced  by  the 
labourer. 

3rd,  That  raising  wages  and  lowering  profits  is  a  discourage- 
ment to  accumulation,  and  acts  in  the  same  way  as  a 
natural  poverty  of  soil. 

4th,  That  by  raising  the  price  of  raw  produce,  the  prices  of  all 
commodities  into  which  raw  produce  enters  would  be 
raised,  and  that  therefore  we  should  not  meet  the 
foreign  manufacturer  on  equal  terms  in  the  general 
market. 

With  respect  to  the  first  objection,  that  by  raising  the  wages  of 
labour  and  lowering  profits,  it  acts  unequally,  as  it  affects  the 
income  of  the  farmer,  trader,  and  manufacturer,  and  leaves 
untaxed  the  income  of  the  landlord,  stockholder,  and  others 
enjoying  fixed  incomes — it  may  be  answered  that  if  the  opera- 
tion of  the  tax  be  unequal  it  is  for  the  legislature  to  make  it 
equal,  by  taxing  directly  the  rent  of  land  and  the  dividends 
from  stock.  By  so  doing,  all  the  objects  of  an  income  tax 
would  be  obtained  without  the  inconvenience  of  having  recourse 
to  the  obnoxious  measure  of  prying  into  every  man's  concerns, 
and  arming  commissioners  with  powers  repugnant  to  the  habits 
and  feelings  of  a  free  country. 

With  respect  to  the  second  objection,  that  there  would  be  a 
considerable  interval  between  the  rise  of  the  price  of  corn  and 
the  rise  of  wages,  during  which  much  distress  would  be  experi- 
enced by  the  lower  classes — I  answer  that  under  different 
circumstances,  wages  follow  the  price  of  raw  produce  with  very 
different  degrees  of  celerity;  that  in  some  cases  no  effect 
whatever  is  produced  on  wages  by  a  rise  of  com;  in  others,  the 
rise  of  wages  precedes  the  rise  in  the  price  of  com;  again,  in 
some  the  effect  on  wages  is  slow,  and  in  others  rapid. 


I02  Political  Economy  " 

Those  who  maintain  that  it  is  the  price  of  necessaries  which 
regulates  the  price  of  labour,  always  allowing  for  the  particular 
state  of  progression  in  which  the  society  may  be,  seem  to  have 
conceded  too  readily  that  a  rise  or  fall  in  the  price  of  necessaries 
will  be  very  slowly  succeeded  by  a  rise  or  fall  of  wages.  A  high 
price  of  provisions  may  arise  from  very  different  causes,  and 
may  accordingly  produce  very  different  effects.  It  may  arise 
from 

I  St,  A  deficient  supply. 

2nd,  From  a  gradually  increasing  demand,  which  may  be 
ultimately  attended  with  an  increased  cost  of  pro- 
duction. 

3rd,  From  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money. 

4th,  From  taxes  on  necessaries. 

These  four  causes  have  not  been  sufficiently  distinguished  and 
separated  by  those  who  have  inquired  into  the  influence  of  a  high 
price  of  necessaries  on  wages.     We  will  examine  them  severally. 

A  bad  harvest  will  produce  a  high  price  of  provisions,  and  the 
high  price  is  the  only  means  by  which  the  consumption  is  com- 
pelled to  conform  to  the  state  of  the  supply.  If  all  the  purchasers 
of  com  were  rich,  the  price  might  rise  to  any  degree,  but  the 
result  would  remain  unaltered;  the  price  would  at  last  be  so 
high,  that  the  least  rich  would  be  obliged  to  forego  the  use  of 
a  part  of  the  quantity  which  they  usually  consumed,  as  by 
diminished  consumption  alone  the  demand  could  be  brought 
down  to  the  limits  of  the  supply.  Under  such  circumstances 
no  policy  can  be  more  absurd  than  that  of  forcibly  regulating 
money  wages  by  the  price  of  food,  as  is  frequently  done,  by  mis- 
application of  the  poor  laws.  Such  a  measure  affords  no  real 
relief  to  the  labourer,  because  its  effect  is  to  raise  still  higher  the 
price  of  com,  and  at  last  he  must  be  obliged  to  limit  his  con- 
sumption in  proportion  to  the  limited  supply.  In  the  natural 
course  of  affairs  a  deficient  supply  from  bad  seasons,  without 
any  pernicious  and  unwise  interference,  would  not  be  followed 
by  a  rise  of  wages.  The  raising  of  wages  is  merely  nominal  to 
those  who  receive  them;  it  increases  the  competition  in  the 
com  market,  and  its  ultimate  effect  is  to  raise  the  profits  of  the 
growers  and  dealers  in  corn.  The  wages  of  labour  are  really 
regulated  by  the  proportion  between  the  supply  and  demand 
of  necessaries,  and  the  supply  and  demand  of  labour;  and 
money  is  merely  the  medium,  or  measure,  in  which  wages  are 
expressed.     In  this  case,  then,  the  distress  of  the  labourer  is 


Taxes  on  Raw  Produce  103 

unavoidable,  and  no  legislation  can  afford  a  remedy,  except 
by  the  importation  of  additional  food  or  by  adopting  the  most 
useful  substitutes. 

When  a  high  price  of  corn  is  the  effect  of  an  increasing  demand, 
it  is  always  preceded  by  an  increase  of  wages,  for  demand 
cannot  increase  without  an  increase  of  means  in  the  people  to 
pay  for  that  which  they  desire.  An  accumulation  of  capital 
naturally  produces  an  increased  competition  among  the  em- 
ployers of  labour,  and  a  consequent  rise  in  its  price.  The 
increased  wages  are  not  always  immediately  expended  on  food, 
but  are  first  made  to  contribute  to  the  other  enjoyments  of 
the  labourer.  His  improved  condition,  however,  induces  and 
enables  him  to  marry,  and  then  the  demand  for  food  for  the 
support  of  his  family  naturally  supersedes  that  of  those  other 
enjoyments  on  which  his  wages  were  temporarily  expended. 
Corn  rises,  then,  because  the  demand  for  it  increases,  because 
there  are  those  in  the  society  who  have  improved  means  of 
paying  for  it;  and  the  profits  of  the  farmer  will  be  raised  above 
the  general  level  of  profits,  till  the  requisite  quantity  of  capital 
has  been  employed  on  its  production.  Whether,  after  this  has 
taken  place,  com  shall  again  fall  to  its  former  price,  or  shall 
continue  permanently  higher,  will  depend  on  the  quality  of  the 
land  from  which  the  increased  quantity  of  corn  has  been  sup- 
plied. If  it  be  obtained  from  land  of  the  same  fertility  as  that 
which  was  last  in  cultivation,  and  with  no  greater  cost  of  labour, 
the  price  will  fall  to  its  former  state;  if  from  poorer  land,  it  will 
continue  permanently  higher.  The  high  wages  in  the  first 
instance  proceeded  from  an  increase  in  the  demand  for  labour: 
inasmuch  as  it  encouraged  marriage,  and  supported  children, 
it  produced  the  effect  of  increasing  the  supply  of  labour.  But 
when  the  supply  is  obtained,  wages  will  again  fall  to  their 
former  price,  if  com  has  fallen  to  its  former  price:  to  a  higher 
than  the  former  price,  if  the  increased  supply  of  corn  has  been 
produced  from  land  of  an  inferior  quality.  A  high  price  is  by 
no  means  incompatible  with  an  abundant  supply:  the  price  is 
permanently  high,  not  because  the  quantity  is  deficient,  but 
because  there  has  been  an  increased  cost  in  producing  it.  It 
generally  happens,  indeed,  that  when  a  stimulus  has  been  given 
to  population,  an  effect  is  produced  beyond  what  the  case 
requires;  the  population  may  be,  and  generally  is,  so  much 
increased  as,  notwithstanding  the  increased  demand 
to  bear  a  greater  proportion  to  the  funds  for  mi 
labourers  than  before  the  increase  of  capital.     Ii 


I04  Political  Economy 

a  reaction  will  take  place,  wages  will  be  below  their  natural 
level,  and  will  continue  so,  till  the  usual  proportion  between 
the  supply  and  demand  has  been  restored.  In  this  case,  then, 
the  rise  in  the  price  of  com  is  preceded  by  a  rise  of  wages,  and 
therefore  entails  no  distress  on  the  labourer. 

A  fall  in  the  value  of  money,  in  consequence  of  an  influx  of  the 
precious  metals  from  the  mines,  or  from  the  abuse  of  the  privi- 
leges of  banking,  is  another  cause  for  the  rise  of  the  price  of  food ; 
but  it  will  make  no  alteration  in  the  quantity  produced.  It 
leaves  undisturbed  too  the  number  of  labourers,  as  well  as  the 
demand  for  them;  for  there  will  be  neither  an  increase  nor  a 
diminution  of  capital.  The  quantity  of  necessaries  to  be  allotted 
to  the  labourer  depends  on  the  comparative  demand  and  supply 
of  necessaries,  with  the  comparative  demand  and  supply  of 
labour;  money  being  only  the  medium  in  which  the  quantity 
is  expressed ;  and  as  neither  of  these  is  altered,  the  real  reward 
of  the  labourer  will  not  alter.  Money  wages  will  rise,  but  they 
will  only  enable  him  to  furnish  himself  with  the  same  quantity 
of  necessaries  as  before.  Those  who  dispute  this  principle  are 
bound  to  show  why  an  increase  of  money  should  not  have  the 
same  effect  in  raising  the  price  of  labour,  the  quantity  of  which 
has  not  been  increased,  as  they  acknowledge  it  would  have  on 
the  price  of  shoes,  of  hats,  and  of  corn,  if  the  quantity  of  those 
commodities  were  not  increased.  The  relative  market  value 
of  hats  and  shoes  is  regulated  by  the  demand  and  supply  of  hats, 
compared  with  the  demand  and  supply  of  shoes,  and  money  is 
but  the  medium  in  which  their  value  is  expressed.  If  shoes  be 
doubled  in  price,  hats  will  also  be  doubled  in  price,  and  they  will 
retain  the  same  comparative  value.  So  if  com  and  all  the 
necessaries  of  the  labourer  be  doubled  in  price,  labour  will  be 
doubled  in  price  also;  and  while  there  is  no  interruption  to  the 
usual  demand  and  supply  of  necessaries  and  of  labour,  there 
can  be  no  reason  why  they  should  not  preserve  their  relative 
value. 

Neither  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money,  nor  a  tax  on  raw  produce, 
though  each  will  raise  the  price,  will  necessarily  interfere  with 
the  quantity  of  raw  produce,  or  with  the  number  of  people,  who 
are  both  able  to  purchase  and  willing  to  consume  it.  It  is  very 
easy  to  perceive  why,  when  the  capital  of  a  country  increases 
irregularly,  wages  should  rise,  whilst  the  price  of  com  remains 
stationary,  or  rises  in  a  less  proportion;  and  why,  when  the 
capital  of  a  country  diminishes,  wages  should  fall  whilst  com 
remains  stationary,  or  falls  in  a  much  less  proportion,  and  this 


Taxes  on  Raw  Produce  105 

too  for  a  considerable  time;  the  reason  is,  because  labour  is  a 
commodity  which  cannot  be  increased  and  diminished  at 
pleasure.  If  there  are  too  few  hats  in  the  market  for  the  demand 
the  price  will  rise,  but  only  for  a  short  time;  for  in  the  course 
of  one  year,  by  employing  more  capital  in  that  trade,  any  reason- 
able addition  may  be  made  to  the  quantity  of  hats,  and  there- 
fore their  market  price  cannot  long  very  much  exceed  their 
natural  price;  but  it  is  not  so  with  men;  you  cannot  increase 
their  number  in  one  or  two  years  when  there  is  an  increase  of 
capital,  nor  can  you  rapidly  diminish  their  number  when  capital 
is  in  a  retrograde  state;  and,  therefore,  the  number  of  hands 
increasing  or  diminishing  slowly,  whilst  the  funds  for  the  main- 
tenance of  labour  increase  or  diminish  rapidly,  there  must  be 
a  considerable  interval  before  the  price  of  labour  is  exactly 
regulated  by  the  price  of  com  and  necessaries;  but  in  the  case 
of  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money,  or  of  a  tax  on  corn,  there  is  not 
necessarily  any  excess  in  the  supply  of  labour,  nor  any  abate- 
ment of  demand,  and  therefore  there  can  be  no  reason  why  the 
labourer  should  sustain  a  real  diminution  of  wages. 

A  tax  on  corn  does  not  necessarily  diminish  the  quantity  of 
corn,  it  only  raises  its  money  price;  it  does  not  necessarily 
diminish  the  demand  compared  with  the  supply  of  labour;  why 
then  should  it  diminish  the  portion  paid  to  the  labourer?  Sup- 
pose it  true  that  it  did  diminish  the  quantity  given  to  the 
labourer,  in  other  words,  that  it  did  not  raise  his  money  wages 
in  the  same  proportion  as  the  tax  raised  the  price  of  the  corn 
which  he  consumed;  would  not  the  supply  of  com  exceed  the 
demand  ?  —  would  it  not  fall  in  price  ?  and  would  not  the 
labourer  thus  obtain  his  usual  portion?  In  such  case,  indeed, 
capital  would  be  withdrawn  from  agriculture;  for  if  the  price 
were  not  increased  by  the  whole  amount  of  the  tax,  agricultural 
profits  would  be  lower  than  the  general  level  of  profits,  and 
capital  would  seek  a  more  advantageous  employment.  In 
regard,  then,  to  a  tax  on  raw  produce,  which  is  the  point  under 
discussion,  it  appears  to  me  that  no  interval  which  could  bear 
oppressively  on  the  labourer  would  elapse  between  the  rise  in 
the  price  of  raw  produce  and  the  rise  in  the  wages  of  the 
labourer;  and  that  therefore  no  other  inconvenience  would  be 
suffered  by  this  class  than  that  which  they  would  suffer  from 
any  other  mode  of  taxation,  namely,  the  risk  that  the  tax  might 
infringe  on  the  funds  destined  for  the  maintenance  of  labour, 
and  might  therefore  check  or  abate  the  demand  for  it. 

With  respect  to  the  third  objection  against  taxes  on  raw 


1 


1 06  Political  Economy 

produce,  namely,  that  the  raising  wages,  and  lowering  prol 
is  a  discouragement  to  accumulation,  and  acts  in  the  same  way 
as  a  natural  poverty  of  soil;  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  in 
another  part  of  this  work  that  savings  may  be  as  effectually 
made  from  expenditure  as  from  production;  from  a  reduction 
in  the  value  of  commodities  as  from  a  rise  in  the  rate  of  profits. 
By  increasing  my  profits  from  £1000  to  £1200,  whilst  prices 
continue  the  same,  my  power  of  increasing  my  capital  by  savings 
is  increased,  but  it  is  not  increased  so  much  as  it  would  be  if  my 
profits  continued  as  before,  whilst  commodities  were  so  lowered 
in  price  that  £800  would  procure  me  as  much  as  £1000  purchased 
before. 

Now  the  sum  required  by  the  tax  must  be  raised,  and  the 
question  simply  is,  whether  the  same  amount  shall  be  taken 
from  individuals  by  diminishing  their  profits,  or  by  raising  the 
prices  of  the  commodities  on  which  their  profits  will  be  expended. 

Taxation  under  every  iarm  presents  but  a  choice  of  evils; 
if  it  do  not  act  on  profit,  or  other  sources  of  income,  it  must 
act  on  expenditure;  and  provided  the  burthen  be  equally 
borne,  and  do  not  repress  reproduction,  it  is  indifferent  on  which 
it  is  laid.  Taxes  on  production,  or  on  the  profits  of  stock, 
whether  applied  immediately  to  profits  or  indirectly  by  taxing 
the  land  or  its  produce,  have  this  advantage  over  other  taxes; 
that,  provided  all  other  income  be  taxed,  no  class  of  the  com- 
munity can  escape  them,  and  each  contributes  according  to 
his  means. 

From  taxes  on  expenditure  a  miser  may  escape ;  he  may  have 
an  income  of  £10,000  per  annum,  and  expend  only  £300;  but 
from  taxes  on  profits,  whether  direct  or  indirect,  he  cannot 
escape;  he  will  contribute  to  them  either  by  giving  up  a  part, 
or  the  value  of  a  part,  of  his  produce;  or  by  the  advanced  prices 
of  the  necessaries  essential  to  production  he  will  be  unable  to 
continue  to  accumulate  at  the  same  rate.  He  may,  indee(ll| 
have  an  income  of  the  same  value,  but  he  will  not  have  thH 
same  command  of  labour,  nor  of  an  equal  quantity  of  materials 
on  which  such  labour  can  be  exercised. 

If  a  country  is  insulated  from  all  others,  having  no  commerce 
with  any  of  its  neighbours,  it  can  in  no  way  shift  any  portion 
of  its  taxes  from  itself.  A  portion  of  the  produce  of  its  land 
and  labour  will  be  devoted  to  the  service  of  the  state;  and  I 
cannot  but  think  that,  unless  it  presses  unequally  on  that  class 
which  accumulates  and  saves,  it  will  be  of  little  importance 
whether  the  taxes  be  levied  on  profits,  on  agricultural,  or  on 


Taxes  on  Raw  Produce  1 07 

manufactured  commodities.  If  my  revenue  be  £1000  per 
annum,  and  I  must  pay  taxes  to  the  amount  of  £ioo,  it  is  of 
little  importance  whether  I  pay  it  from  my  revenue,  leaving 
myself  only  £900,  or  pay  £100  in  addition  for  my  agricultural 
commodities,  or  for  my  manufactured  goods.  If  £100  is  my 
fair  proportion  of  the  expenses  of  the  country,  the  virtue  of 
taxation  consists  in  making  sure  that  I  shall  pay  that  £100, 
neither  more  nor  less;  and  that  cannot  be  effected  in  any 
manner  so  securely  as  by  taxes  on  wages,  profits,  or  raw  produce. 

The  fourth  and  last  objection  which  remains  to  be  noticed  is: 
That  by  raising  the  price  of  raw  produce,  the  prices  of  all  commo- 
dities into  which  raw  produce  enters  will  be  raised,  and  that, 
therefore,  we  shall  not  meet  the  foreign  manufacturer  on  equal 
terms  in  the  general  market. 

In  the  first  place,  corn  and  all  home  commodities  could  not  be 
materially  raised  in  price  without  an  influx  of  the  precious 
metals ;  for  the  same  quantity  of  money  could  not  circulate  the 
same  quantity  of  commodities  at  high  as  at  low  prices,  and  the 
precious  metals  never  could  be  purchased  with  dear  commo- 
dities. When  more  gold  is  required,  it  must  be  obtained  by 
giving  more  and  not  fewer  commodities  in  exchange  for  it. 
Neither  could  the  want  of  money  be  supplied  by  paper,  for  it 
is  not  paper  that  regulates  the  value  of  gold  as  a  commodity, 
but  gold  that  regulates  the  value  of  paper.  Unless,  then,  the 
value  of  gold  could  be  lowered,  no  paper  could  be  added  to  the 
circulation  without  being  depreciated.  And  that  the  value 
of  gold  could  not  be  lowered  appears  clear  when  we  consider 
that  the  value  of  gold  as  a  commodity  must  be  regulated  by  the 
quantity  of  goods  which  must  be  given  to  foreigners  in  exchange 
for  it.  When  gold  is  cheap,  commodities  are  dear;  and  when 
gold  is  dear,  commodities  are  cheap,  and  fall  in  price.  Now  as 
no  cause  is  shown  why  foreigners  should  sell  their  gold  cheaper 
than  usual,  it  does  not  appear  probable  that  there  would  be 
any  influx  of  gold.  Without  such  an  influx  there  can  be  no 
increase  of  quantity,  no  fall  in  its  value,  no  rise  in  the  general 
price  of  goods. ^ 

The  probable  effect  of  a  tax  on  raw  produce  would  be  to 
raise  the  price  of  raw  produce,  and  of  all  commodities  in  which 
raw  produce  entered,  but  not  in  any  degree  proportioned  to  the 
tax;  while  other  commodities  in  which  no  raw  produce  entered, 

*  It  may  be  doubted  whether  commodities,  raised  in  price  merely  by 
taxation,  would  require  any  more  money  for  their  circulation.  I  believe 
they  would  not. 


■ 


io8  Political  Economy 

such  as  articles  made  of  the  metals  and  the  earths,  would  fall 
in  price :  so  that  the  same  quantity  of  money  as  before  would  be 
adequate  to  the  whole  circulation. 

A  tax  which  should  have  the  effect  of  raising  the  price  of  all 
home  productions  would  not  discourage  exportation,  except 
during  a  very  limited  time.  If  they  were  raised  in  price  at  home, 
they  could  not  indeed  immediately  be  profitably  exported, 
because  they  would  be  subject  to  a  burthen  here  from  which 
abroad  they  were  free.  The  tax  would  produce  the  same  effect 
as  an  alteration  in  the  value  of  money,  which  was  not  general 
and  common  to  all  countries,  but  confined  to  a  single  one.  If 
England  were  that  country,  she  might  not  be  able  to  sell,  but  she 
would  be  able  to  buy,  because  importable  commodities  would 
not  be  raised  in  price.  Under  these  circumstances  nothing  but 
money  could  be  exported  in  return  for  foreign  commodities, 
but  this  is  a  trade  which  could  not  long  continue;  a  nation 
cannot  be  exhausted  of  its  money,  for  after  a  certain  quantity 
has  left  it,  the  value  of  the  remainder  will  rise,  and  such  a  price 
of  commodities  will  be  the  consequence  that  they  will  again 
be  capable  of  being  profitably  exported.  When  money  had 
risen,  therefore,  we  should  no  longer  export  it  in  return  for 
goods,  but  we  should  export  those  manufactures  which  had  first 
been  raised  in  price  by  the  rise  in  the  price  of  the  raw  produce 
from  which  they  were  made,  and  then  again  lowered  by  the 
exportation  of  money. 

But  it  may  be  objected  that  when  money  so  rose  in  value  it 
would  rise  with  respect  to  foreign  as  well  as  home  commodities, 
and  therefore  that  all  encouragement  to  import  foreign  goods 
would  cease.  Thus,  suppose  we  imported  goods  which  cost 
£ioo  abroad,  and  which  sold  for  £120  here,  we  should  cease  to 
import  them  when  the  value  of  money  had  so  risen  in  England 
that  they  would  only  sell  for  £100  here:  this,  however,  could 
never  happen.  The  motive  which  determines  us  to  import  a 
commodity  is  the  discovery  of  its  relative  cheapness  abroad: 
it  is  the  comparison  of  its  price  abroad  with  its  price  at  home. 
If  a  country  export  hats,  and  import  cloth,  it  does  so  because 
it  can  obtain  more  cloth  by  making  hats  and  exchanging  them 
for  cloth  than  if  it  made  the  cloth  inself.  If  the  rise  of  raw 
produce  occasions  any  increased  cost  of  production  in  making 
hats,  it  would  occasion  also  an  increased  cost  in  making  cloth. 
If,  therefore,  both  commodities  were  made  at  home,  they  would 
both  rise.  One,  however,  being  a  commodity  which  we  import, 
would  not  rise,  neither  would  it  fall  when  the  value  of  money 


Taxes  on  Raw  Produce  109 

rose;  for  by  not  falling  it  would  regain  its  natural  relation  to 
the  exported  commodity.  The  rise  of  raw  produce  makes  a 
hat  rise  from  305.  to  $$s.,  or  10  per  cent.:  the  same  cause,  if 
we  manufactured  cloth,  would  make  it  rise  from  20s.  to  225.  per 
yard.  This  rise  does  not  destroy  the  relation  between  cloth  and 
hats ;  a  hat  was,  and  continues  to  be,  worth  one  yard  and  a  half  ^ 
of  cloth.  But  if  we  import  cloth,  its  price  will  continue  uni- 
formly at  205.  per  yard,  unaffected  first  by  the  fall,  and  then 
by  the  rise  in  the  value  of  money;  whilst  hats,  which  had  risen 
from  305.  to  ^^s.,  will  again  fall  from  335.  to  305.,  at  which 
point  the  relation  between  cloth  and  hats  will  be  restored. 

To  simplify  the  consideration  of  this  subject,  I  have  been 
supposing  that  a  rise  in  the  value  of  raw  materials  would  affect, 
in  an  equal  proportion,  all  home  commodities ;  that  if  the  effect 
on  one  were  to  raise  it  10  per  cent.,  it  would  raise  all  10  per  cent. ; 
but  as  the  value  of  commodities  is  very  differently  made  up  of 
raw  material  and  labour;  as  some  commodities,  for  instance, 
all  those  made  from  the  metals,  would  be  unaffected  by  the  rise 
of  raw  produce  from  the  surface  of  the  earth,  it  is  evident  that 
tliere  would  be  the  greatest  variety  in  the  effects  produced  on 
the  value  of  commodities  by  a  tax  on  raw  produce.  As  far  as 
this  effect  was  produced,  it  would  stimulate  or  retard  the  expor- 
tation of  particular  commodities,  and  would  undoubtedly  be 
attended  with  the  same  inconvenience  that  attends  the  taxing 
of  commodities;  it  would  destroy  the  natural  relation  between 
the  value  of  each.  Thus  the  natural  price  of  a  hat,  instead  of 
being  the  same  as  a  yard  and  a  half  of  cloth,  might  only  be  of 
the  value  of  a  yard  and  a  quarter,  or  it  might  be  of  the  value 
of  a  yard  and  three  quarters,  and  therefore  rather  a  different 
direction  might  be  given  to  foreign  trade.  All  these  incon- 
veniences would  probably  not  interfere  with  the  value  of  the 
exports  and  imports;  they  would  only  prevent  the  very  best 
distribution  of  the  capital  of  the  whole  world,  which  is  never 
so  well  regulated  as  when  every  commodity  is  freely  allowed 
to  settle  at  its  natural  price,  unfettered  by  artificial  restraints. 

Although,  then,  the  rise  in  the  price  of  most  of  our  own  com- 
modities would  for  a  time  check  exportation  generally,  and 
might  permanently  prevent  the  exportation  of  a  few  commo- 
dities, it  could  not  materially  interfere  with  foreign  trade,  and 
would  not  place  us  under  any  comparative  disadvantage  as  far 
as  regarded  competition  in  foreign  markets. 


CHAPTER  X 

TAXES     ON    RENT 

A  TAX  on  rent  would  affect  rent  only;  it  would  fall  wholly  on 
landlords,  and  could  not  be  shifted  to  any  class  of  consumers. 
The  landlord  could  not  raise  his  rent,  because  he  would  leave 
unaltered  the  difference  between  the  produce  obtained  from 
the  least  productive  land  in  cultivation,  and  that  obtained 
from  land  of  every  other  quality.  Three  sorts  of  land,  No.  i, 
2,  and  3,  are  in  cultivation,  and  yield  respectively,  with  the 
same  labour,  i8o,  170,  and  160  quarters  of  wheat;  but  No.  3 
pays  no  rent,  and  is  therefore  untaxed:  the  rent  then  of  No.  2 
cannot  be  made  to  exceed  the  value  of  ten,  nor  No.  i  of  twenty 
quarters.  Such  a  tax  could  not  raise  the  price  of  raw  produce, 
because,  as  the  cultivator  of  No.  3  pays  neither  rent  nor  tax, 
he  would  in  no  way  be  enabled  to  raise  the  price  of  the  com- 
modity produced.  A  tax  on  rent  would  not  discourage  the 
cultivation  of  fresh  land,  for  such  land  pays  no  rent,  and  would 
be  untaxed.  If  No.  4  were  taken  into  cultivation,  and  yielded 
150  quarters,  no  tax  would  be  paid  for  such  land;  but  it  would 
create  a  rent  of  ten  quarters  on  No.  3,  which  would  then  com- 
mence paying  the  tax. 

A  tax  on  rent,  as  rent  is  constituted,  would  discourage  culti- 
vation, because  it  would  be  a  tax  on  the  profits  of  the  landlord. 
The  term  rent  of  land,  as  I  have  elsewhere  observed,  is  applied 
to  the  whole  amount  of  the  value  paid  by  the  farmer  to  his 
landlord,  a  part  only  of  which  is  strictly  rent.  The  buildings 
and  fixtures,  and  other  expenses  paid  for  by  the  landlord,  form 
strictly  a  part  of  the  stock  of  the  farm,  and  must  have  been 
furnished  by  the  tenant,  if  not  provided  by  the  landlord.  Rent 
is  the  sum  paid  to  the  landlord  for  the  use  of  the  land,  and  for 
the  use  of  the  land  only.  The  further  sum  that  is  paid  to  him 
under  the  name  of  rent  is  for  the  use  of  the  buildings,  etc.,  and 
is  really  the  profits  of  the  landlord's  stock.  In  taxing  rent,  as 
no  distinction  would  be  made  between  that  part  paid  for  the 
use  of  the  land,  and  that  paid  for  the  use  of  the  landlord's  stock, 
a  portion  of  the  tax  would  fall  on  the  landlord's  profits,  and 
would,  therefore,  discourage  cultivation,  unless  the  price  of  raw 

no 


Taxes  on  Rent  1 1 1 

produce  rose.  On  that  land,  for  the  use  of  which  no  rent  was 
paid,  a  compensation  under  that  name  might  be  given  to  the 
landlord  for  the  use  of  his  buildings.  These  buildings  would 
not  be  erected,  nor  would  raw  produce  be  grown  on  such  land, 
till  the  price  at  which  it  sold  would  not  only  pay  for  all  the 
usual  outgoings,  but  also  this  additional  one  of  the  tax.  This 
part  of  the  tax  does  not  fall  on  the  landlord,  nor  on  the  farmer, 
but  on  the  consumer  of  raw  produce. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  but  that  if  a  tax  were  laid  on  rent, 
landlords  would  soon  find  a  way  to  discriminate  between  that 
which  is  paid  to  them  for  the  use  of  the  land,  and  that  which  is 
paid  for  the  use  of  the  buildings,  and  the  improvements  which 
are  made  by  the  landlord's  stock.  The  latter  would  either  be 
called  the  rent  of  house  and  buildings,  or  on  all  new  land  taken 
into  cultivation  such  buildings  would  be  erected  and  improve- 
ments would  be  made  by  the  tenant  and  not  by  the  landlord. 
The  landlord's  capital  might  indeed  be  really  employed  for  that 
purpose;  it  might  be  nominally  expended  by  the  tenant,  the 
landlord  furnishing  him  with  the  means,  either  in  the  shape  of 
a  loan,  or  in  the  purchase  of  an  annuity  for  the  duration  of  the 
lease.  Whether  distinguished  or  not,  there  is  a  real  difference 
between  the  nature  of  the  compensations  which  the  landlord 
receives  for  these  different  objects;  and  it  is  quite  certain  that 
a  tax  on  the  real  rent  of  land  falls  wholly  on  the  landlord,  but 
that  a  tax  on  that  remuneration  which  the  landlord  receives  for 
the  use  of  this  stock  expended  on  the  farm,  falls,  in  a  progressive 
country,  on  the  consumer  of  raw  produce.  If  a  tax  were  laid 
on  rent,  and  no  means  of  separating  the  remuneration  now  paid 
by  the  tenant  to  the  landlord  under  the  name  of  rent  were 
adopted,  the  tax,  as  far  as  it  regarded  the  rent  on  the  buildings 
and  other  fixtures,  would  never  fall  for  any  length  of  time  on 
the  landlord,  but  on  the  consumer.  The  capital  expended  on 
these  buildings,  etc.,  must  afford  the  usual  profit  of  stock;  but 
it  would  cease  to  afford  this  profit  on  the  land  last  cultivated  if 
the  expenses  of  those  buildings,  etc.,  did  not  fall  on  the  tenant; 
and  if  they  did,  the  tenant  would  then  cease  to  make  his  usual 
profits  of  stock,  unless  he  could  charge  them  on  the  consumer. 


CHAPTER  XI 

TITHES 

Tithes  are  a  tax  on  the  gross  produce  of  the  land,  and,  like 
taxes  on  raw  produce,  fall  wholly  on  the  consumer.  They  differ 
from  a  tax  on  rent,  inasmuch  as  they  affect  land  which  such  a 
tax  would  not  reach;  and  raise  the  price  of  raw  produce  which 
that  tax  would  not  alter.  Lands  of  the  worst  quality,  as  well 
as  of  the  best,  pay  tithes,  and  exactly  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  produce  obtained  from  them;  tithes  are  therefore 
an  equal  tax. 

If  land  of  the  last  quality,  or  that  which  pays  no  rent,  and 
which  regulates  the  price  of  com,  yield  a  sufficient  quantity  to 
give  the  farmer  the  usual  prefits  of  stock,  when  the  price  of 
wheat  is  £4  per  quarter,  the  price  must  rise  to  £4  Ss.  before  the 
same  profits  can  be  obtained  after  the  tithes  are  imposed, 
because  for  ever>'  quarter  of  wheat  the  cultivator  must  pay 
eight  shillings  to  the  church,  and  if  he  does  not  obtain  the  same 
profits,  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  not  quit  his  employ- 
ment, when  he  can  get  them  in  other  trades. 

The  only  difference  between  tithes  and  taxes  on  raw  produce 
is  that  one  is  a  variable  money  tax,  the  other  a  fixed  money 
tax.  In  a  stationary  state  of  society,  where  there  is  neither 
increased  nor  diminished  facility  of  producing  com,  they  will 
be  precisely  the  same  in  their  effects;  for,  in  such  a  state,  com 
will  be  at  an  invariable  price,  and  the  tax  will  therefore  be  also 
invariable.  In  either  a  retrograde  state,  or  in  a  state  in  which 
great  improvements  are  made  in  agriculture,  and  where  con- 
sequently raw  produce  will  fall  in  value  comparatively  with 
other  things,  tithes  will  be  a  lighter  tax  than  a  permanent 
money  tax;  for  if  the  price  of  com  should  fall  from  £4  to  £^, 
the  tax  would  fall  from  eight  to  six  shillings.  In  a  progressive 
state  of  society,  yet  without  any  marked  improvements  in 
agriculture,  the  price  of  corn  would  rise,  and  tithes  would  be 
a  heavier  tax  than  a  permanent  money  tax.  If  corn  rose  from 
£4  to  £5,  the  tithes  on  the  same  land  would  advance  from  eight 
to  ten  shillings. 

Neither  tithes  nor  a  money  tax  will  affect  the  money  rent  of 

112 


I 


Tithes  1 1 3 

landlords,  but  both  will  materially  affect  com  rents.  We  have 
already  observed  how  a  money  tax  operates  on  com  rents,  and 
it  is  equally  evident  that  a  similar  effect  would  be  produced  by 
tithes.  If  the  lands,  No.  i,  2,  3,  respectively  produced  180, 
170,  and  160  quarters,  the  rents  might  be  on  No.  i,  twenty 
quarters,  and  on  No.  2,  ten  quarters;  but  they  would  no  longer 
preserve  that  proportion  after  the  payment  of  tithes;  for  if  a 
tenth  be  taken  from  each,  the  remaining  produce  will  be  162, 
153, 144,  and  consequently  the  com  rent  of  No.  i  will  be  reduced 
to  eighteen,  and  that  of  No.  2  to  nine  quarters.  But  the  price 
of  corn  would  rise  from  £4  to  £4  Ss.  lofJ.;  for  144  quarters  are 
to  £4  as  160  quarters  to  £4  Ss.  lo^d.  and  consequently  the 
money  rent  would  continue  unaltered;  for  on  No.  i  it  would 
be  £80,^  and  on  No.  2,  £40 .^ 

The  chief  objection  against  tithes  is  that  they  are  not  a 
permanent  and  fixed  tax,  but  increase  in  value  in  proportion 
as  the  difficulty  of  producing  com  increases.  If  those  diffi- 
culties should  make  the  price  of  com  £4,  the  tax  is  Ss.;  if  they 
should  increase  it  to  £5,  the  tax  is  105.;  and  at  £6  it  is  12^. 
They  not  only  rise  in  value,  but  they  increase  in  amount:  thus, 
when  No.  i  was  cultivated,  the  tax  was  only  levied  on  180 
quarters;  when  No.  2  was  cultivated,  it  was  levied  on  180 
+  170,  or  350  quarters;  and  when  No.  3  was  cultivated,  on 
180+  170+  160  =  510  quarters.  Not  only  is  the  amount  of 
tax  increased  from  100,000  quarters  to  200,000  quarters  when 
the  produce  is  increased  from  one  to  two  millions  of  quarters; 
but,  owing  to  the  increased  labour  necessary  to  produce  the 
second  million,  the  relative  value  of  raw  produce  is  so  advanced 
that  the  200,000  quarters  may  be,  though  only  twice  in  quantity, 
yet  in  value  three  times  that  of  the  100,000  quarters  which  were 
paid  before. 

If  an  equal  value  were  raised  for  the  church  by  any  other 
means,  increasing  in  the  same  manner  as  tithes  increase,  pro- 
portionably  with  the  difficulty  of  cultivation,  the  effect  would 
be  the  same;  and  therefore  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that, 
because  they  are  raised  on  the  land,  they  discourage  cultivation 
more  than  an  equal  amount  would  do  if  raised  in  any  other 
manner.  The  church  would  in  both  cases  be  constantly  obtain- 
ing an  increased  portion  of  the  net  produce  of  the  land  and 
labour  of  the  country.  In  an  improving  state  of  society,  the 
net  produce  of  land  is  always  diminishing  in  proportion  to  its 
gross  produce;  but  it  is  from  the  net  income  of  a  country  that 

'  iS  quarters  at  £4  8s.  lofrf.  '9  quarters  at  £4  85.  lofi. 

H 


114  Political  Economy 

all  taxes  are  ultimately  paid,  either  in  a  progressive  or  in  a 
stationary  country.  A  tax  increasing  with  the  gross  income, 
and  falling  on  the  net  income,  must  necessarily  be  a  very 
burdensome  and  a  very  intolerable  tax.  Tithes  are  a  tenth 
of  the  gross  and  not  of  the  net  produce  of  the  land,  and  there- 
fore as  society  improves  in  wealth,  they  must,  though  the  same 
proportion  of  the  gross  produce,  become  a  larger  and  larger 
proportion  of  the  net  produce. 

Tithes,  however,  may  be  considered  as  injurious  to  landlords, 
inasmuch  as  they  act  as  a  bounty  on  importation,  by  taxing 
the  growth  of  home  com  while  the  importation  of  foreign  com 
remains  unfettered.  And  if,  in  order  to  relieve  the  landlords 
from  the  effects  of  the  diminished  demand  for  land  which  such 
a  bounty  must  encourage,  imported  corn  were  also  taxed,  in 
an  equal  degree  with  com  grown  at  home,  and  the  produce  paid 
to  the  state,  no  measure  could  be  more  fair  and  equitable; 
since  whatever  were  paid  to  the  state  by  this  tax  would  go  to 
diminish  the  other  taxes  which  the  expenses  of  government 
make  necessary;  but  if  such  a  tax  were  devoted  only  to  increase 
the  fund  paid  to  the  church,  it  might  indeed  on  the  whole  in- 
crease the  general  mass  of  production,  but  it  would  diminish 
the  portion  of  that  mass  allotted  to  the  productive  classes.        'j 

If  the  trade  of  cloth  were  left  perfectly  free,  our  manufac-1 
turers  might  be  able  to  sell  cloth  cheaper  than  we  could  import 
it.  If  a  tax  were  laid  on  the  home  manufacturer,  and  not  on 
the  importer  of  cloth,  capital  might  be  injuriously  driven  from 
the  manufacture  of  cloth  to  the  manufacture  of  some  other 
commodity,  as  cloth  might  then  be  imported  cheaper  than  it 
could  be  made  at  home.  If  imported  cloth  should  also  be  taxed, 
cloth  would  again  be  manufactured  at  home.  The  consumer 
first  bought  cloth  at  home  because  it  was  cheaper  than  foreign 
cloth;  he  then  bought  foreign  cloth  because  it  was  cheaper 
untaxed  than  home  cloth  taxed:  he  lastly  bought  it  again  at 
home  because  it  was  cheaper  when  both  home  and  foreign  cloth 
were  taxed.  It  is  in  the  last  case  that  he  pays  the  greatest 
price  for  his  cloth;  but  all  his  additional  payment  is  gained  by 
the  state.  In  the  second  case,  he  pays  more  than  in  the  first, 
but  all  he  pays  in  addition  is  not  received  by  the  state,  it  is 
an  increased  price  caused  by  difficulty  of  production,  which  is 
incurred  because  the  easiest  means  of  production  are  taken 
away  from  us  by  being  fettered  with  a  tax. 


CHAPTER  XII 

LAND-TAX 

A  LAND-TAX,  levied  in  proportion  to  the  rent  of  land,  and  vary- 
ing with  every  variation  of  rent,  is  in  effect  a  tax  on  rent;  and 
as  such  a  tax  will  not  apply  to  that  land  which  yields  no  rent, 
nor  to  the  produce  of  that  capital  which  is  employed  on  the 
land  with  a  view  to  profit  merely,  and  which  never  pays  rent; 
it  will  not  in  any  way  affect  the  price  of  raw  produce,  but  will 
fall  wholly  on  the  landlords.  In  no  respect  would  such  a  tax 
differ  from  a  tax  on  rent.  But  if  a  land-tax  be  imposed  on  all 
cultivated  land,  however  moderate  that  tax  may  be,  it  will  be 
a  tax  on  produce,  and  will  therefore  raise  the  price  of  produce. 
If  No.  3  be  the  land  last  cultivated,  although  it  should  pay  no 
rent,  it  cannot,  after  the  tax,  be  cultivated,  and  afford  the 
general  rate  of  profit,  unless  the  price  of  produce  rise  to  meet 
the  tax.  Either  capital  will  be  withheld  from  that  employment 
until  the  price  of  com  shall  have  risen,  in  consequence  of  demand, 
suflSciently  to  afford  the  usual  profit;  or  if  already  employed 
on  such  land,  it  will  quit  it,  to  seek  a  more  advantageous  em- 
ployment. The  tax  cannot  be  removed  to  the  landlord,  for  by 
the  supposition  he  receives  no  rent.  Such  a  tax  may  be  pro- 
portioned to  the  quality  of  the  land  and  the  abundance  of  its 
produce,  and  then  it  differs  in  no  respect  from  tithes ;  or  it  may 
be  a  fixed  tax  per  acre  on  all  land  cultivated,  whatever  its 
quality  may  be. 

A  land-tax  of  this  latter  description  would  be  a  very  unequal 
tax,  and  would  be  contrary  to  one  of  the  four  maxims  with 
regard  to  taxes  in  general,  to  which,  according  to  Adam  Smith, 
all  taxes  should  conform.     The  four  maxims  are  as  follow: — 

1.  "  The  subjects  of  every  state  ought  to  contribute  towards 

the  support  of  the  government,  as  nearly  as  possible 
in  proportion  to  their  respective  abilities. 

2.  "  The  tax  which  each  individual  is  bound  to  pay  ought  to 

be  certain,  and  not  arbitrary. 

3.  "  Every  tax  ought  to  be  levied  at  the  time  or  in  the 

manner  in  which  it  is  most  likely  to  be  convenient  for 
the  contributor  to  pay  it. 
"5 


1 1 6  Political  Economy 

4.  "  Every  tax  ought  to  be  so  contrived  as  both  to  take  out 
and  to  keep  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  people  as  little 
as  possible,  over  and  above  what  it  brings  into  the 
public  treasury  of  the  state." 

An  equal  land-tax,  imposed  indiscriminately  and  without  any 
regard  to  the  distinction  of  its  quality,  on  all  land  cultivated, 
will  raise  the  price  of  com  in  proportion  to  the  tax  paid  by  the 
cultivator  of  the  land  of  the  worst  quality.  Lands  of  different 
quality,  with  the  employment  of  the  same  capital,  will  yield 
very  different  quantities  of  raw  produce.  If  on  the  land  which 
yields  a  thousand  quarters  of  com  with  a  given  capital  a  tax 
of  £100  be  laid,  corn  will  rise  2s.  per  quarter  to  compensate  the 
farmer  for  the  tax.  But  with  the  same  capital  on  land  of  a 
better  quality,  2000  quarters  may  be  produced,  which  at  25. 
a  quarter  advance  would  give  £200 ;  the  tax,  however,  bearing 
equally  on  both  lands,  will  be  £100  on  the  better  as  well  as  on 
the  inferior,  and  consequently  the  consumer  of  corn  will  be 
taxed,  not  only  to  pay  the  exigencies  of  the  state,  but  also  to 
give  to  the  cultivator  of  the  better  land  £100  per  annum  during 
the  period  of  his  lease,  and  afterwards  to  raise  the  rent  of  the 
landlord  to  that  amount.  A  tax  of  this  description,  then, 
would  be  contrary  to  the  fourth  maxim  of  Adam  Smith — it 
would  take  out  and  keep  out  of  the  pockets  of  the  people  more 
than  what  it  brought  into  the  treasury  of  the  state.  The  taille 
in  France,  before  the  Revolution,  was  a  tax  of  this  description; 
those  lands  only  were  taxed  which  were  held  by  an  ignoble 
tenure,  the  price  of  raw  produce  rose  in  proportion  to  the  tax, 
and  therefore  they  whose  lands  were  not  taxed  were  benefited 
by  the  increase  of  their  rent.  Taxes  on  raw  produce,  as  well  as 
tithes,  are  free  from  this  objection:  they  raise  the  price  of  raw 
produce,  but  they  take  from  each  quality  of  land  a  contribution 
in  proportion  to  its  actual  produce,  and  not  in  proportion  t^l 
the  produce  of  that  which  is  the  least  productive.  ™l 

From  the  peculiar  view  which  Adam  Smith  took  of  rent,  from 
his  not  having  observed  that  much  capital  is  expended  in  every 
country  on  the  land  for  which  no  rent  is  paid,  he  concluded  that 
all  taxes  on  the  land,  whether  they  were  laid  on  the  land  itself 
in  the  form  of  land-tax  or  tithes,  or  on  the  produce  of  the  land, 
or  were  taken  from  the  profits  of  the  farmer,  were  all  invariably 
paid  by  the  landlord,  and  that  he  was  in  all  cases  the  real  con- 
tributor, although  the  tax  was,  in  general,  nominally  advanced 
by  the  tenant.     "  Taxes  upon  the  produce  of  the  land,"  he  says, 


Land-Tax  1 1 7 

"  are  in  reality  taxes  upon  the  rent;  and  though  they  may  be 
originally  advanced  by  the  farmer,  are  finally  paid  by  the  land- 
lord. When  a  certain  portion  of  the  produce  is  to  be  paid  away 
for  a  tax,  the  farmer  computes  as  well  as  he  can  what  the  value 
of  this  portion  is,  one  year  with  another,  likely  to  amount  to, 
and  he  makes  a  proportionable  abatement  in  the  rent  which  he 
agrees  to  pay  to  the  landlord.  There  is  no  farmer  who  does  not 
compute  beforehand  what  the  church-tithe,  which  is  a  land-tax 
of  this  kind,  is,  one  year  with  another,  likely  to  amount  to." 
It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  the  farmer  does  calculate  his  prob- 
able outgoings  of  all  descriptions  when  agreeing  with  his  land- 
lord for  the  rent  of  his  farm;  and  if,  for  the  tithe  paid  to  the 
church,  or  for  the  tax  on  the  produce  of  the  land,  he  were  not 
compensated  by  a  rise  in  the  relative  value  of  the  produce  of 
his  farm,  he  would  naturally  endeavour  to  deduct  them  from 
his  rent.  But  this  is  precisely  the  question  in  dispute :  whether 
he  will  eventually  deduct  them  from  his  rent,  or  be  compensated 
by  a  higher  price  of  produce.  For  the  reasons  which  have  been 
already  given,  I  cannot  have  the  least  doubt  but  that  they 
would  raise  the  price  of  produce,  and  consequently  that  Adam 
Smith  has  taken  an  incorrect  view  of  this  important  question. 

Dr.  Smith's  view  of  this  subject  is  probably  the  reason  why 
he  has  described  ''  the  tithe,  and  every  other  land-tax  of  this 
kind,  under  the  appearance  of  perfect  equality,  as  very  unequal 
taxes;  a  certain  portion  of  the  produce  being  in  different 
situations  equivalent  to  a  very  different  portion  of  the  rent." 
I  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  such  taxes  do  not  fall  with 
unequal  weight  on  the  different  classes  of  farmers  or  landlords, 
as  they  are  both  compensated  by  the  rise  of  raw  produce,  and 
only  contribute  to  the  tax  in  proportion  as  they  are  consumers 
of  raw  produce.  Inasmuch  indeed  as  wages,  and  through 
wages,  the  rate  of  profits  are  affected,  landlords,  instead  of 
contributing  their  full  share  to  such  a  tax,  are  the  class  peculiarly 
exempted.  It  is  the  profits  of  stock  from  which  that  portion 
of  the  tax  is  derived  which  falls  on  those  labourers,  who,  from 
the  insufficiency  of  their  funds,  are  incapable  of  paying  taxes; 
this  portion  is  exclusively  borne  by  all  those  whose  income  is 
derived  from  the  employment  of  stock,  and  therefore  it  in  no 
degree  affects  landlords. 

It  is  not  to  be  inferred  from  this  view  of  tithes,  and  taxes  on 
the  land  and  its  produce,  that  they  do  not  discourage  cultiva- 
tion. Ever>'thing  which  raises  the  exchangeable  value  of 
commodities  of  any  kind  which  are  in  very  general  demand 


1 1 8  Political  Economy 

tends  to  discourage  both  cultivation  and  production;  but  this 
is  an  evil  inseparable  from  all  taxation,  and  is  not  confined  to 
the  particular  taxes  of  which  we  are  now  speaking. 

This  may  be  considered,  indeed,  as  the  unavoidable  disad- 
vantage attending  all  taxes  received  and  expended  by  the  state. 
Every  new  tax  becomes  a  new  charge  on  production,  and  raises 
natural  price.  A  portion  of  the  labour  of  the  country  which 
was  before  at  the  disposal  of  the  contributor  to  the  tax  is  placed 
at  the  disposal  of  the  state,  and  cannot  therefore  be  employed 
productively.  This  portion  may  become  so  large  that  sufficient 
surplus  produce  may  not  be  left  to  stimulate  the  exertions  of 
those  who  usually  augment  by  their  savings  the  capital  of  the 
state.  Taxation  has  happily  never  yet  in  any  free  country 
been  carried  so  far  as  constantly  from  year  to  year  to  diminish 
its  capital.  Such  a  state  of  taxation  could  not  be  long  endured; 
or  if  endured,  it  would  be  constantly  absorbing  so  much  of  the 
annual  produce  of  the  country  as  to  occasion  the  most  extensive 
scene  of  misery,  famine,  and  depopulation. 

''  A  land-tax,"  says  Adam  Smith,  "  which,  like  that  of  Great 
Britain,  is  assessed  upon  each  district  according  to  a  certain 
invariable  canon,  though  it  should  be  equal  at  the  time  of  its 
first  establishment,  necessarily  becomes  unequal  in  process  of 
time,  according  to  the  unequal  degrees  of  improvement  or 
neglect  in  the  cultivation  of  the  different  parts  of  the  country. 
In  England  the  valuation  according  to  which  the  different 
counties  and  parishes  were  assessed  to  the  land-tax  by  the  4th 
William  and  Mary  was  very  unequal,  even  at  its  first  establish- 
ment. This  tax,  therefore,  so  far  offends  against  the  first  of 
the  four  maxims  above  mentioned.  It  is  perfectly  agreeable 
to  the  other  three.  It  is  perfectly  certain.  The  time  of  pay- 
ment for  the  tax  being  the  same  as  that  for  the  rent,  is  as  con- 
venient as  it  can  be  to  the  contributor.  Though  the  landlord 
is  in  all  cases  the  real  contributor,  the  tax  is  commonly  advanced 
by  the  tenant,  to  whom  the  landlord  is  obliged  to  allow  it  in 
the  payment  of  the  rent." 

If  the  tax  be  shifted  by  the  tenant  not  on  the  landlord  but 
on  the  consumer,  then  if  it  be  not  unequal  at  first,  it  can  never 
become  so;  for  the  price  of  produce  has  been  at  once  raised  in 
proportion  to  the  tax,  and  will  afterwards  vary  no  more  on  that 
account.  It  may  offend,  if  unequal,  as  I  have  attempted  to 
show  that  it  will,  against  the  fourth  maxim  above  mentioned, 
but  it  will  not  offend  against  the  first.  It  may  take  more  out 
of  the  pockets  of  the  people  than  it  brings  into  the  public 


Land-Tax  1 1 9 

treasury  of  the  state,  but  it  will  not  fall  unequally  on  any 
particular  class  of  contributors.  M.  Say  appears  to  me  to  have 
mistaken  the  nature  and  effects  of  the  English  land-tax,  when 
he  says,  "  Many  persons  attribute  to  this  fixed  valuation  the 
great  prosperity  of  English  agriculture.  That  it  has  very  much 
contributed  to  it  there  can  be  no  doubt.  But  what  should  we 
say  to  a  government  which,  addressing  itself  to  a  small  trader, 
should  hold  this  language :  *  With  a  small  capital  you  are 
carrying  on  a  limited  trade,  and  your  direct  contribution  is  in 
consequence  very  small.  Borrow  and  accumulate  capital; 
extend  your  trade,  so  that  it  may  procure  you  immense  profits ; 
yet  you  shall  never  pay  a  greater  contribution.  Moreover, 
when  your  successors  shall  inherit  your  profits,  and  shall  have 
further  increased  them,  they  shall  not  be  valued  higher  to  them 
than  they  are  to  you;  and  your  successors  shall  not  bear  a 
greater  portion  of  the  public  burdens.' 

"  Without  doubt  this  would  be  a  great  encouragement  given 
to  manufacturers  and  trade;  but  would  it  be  just?  Could  not 
their  advancement  be  obtained  at  any  other  price  ?  In  England 
itself,  has  not  manufacturing  and  commercial  industry  made 
even  greater  progress,  since  the  same  period,  without  being 
distinguished  with  so  much  partiality?  A  landlord  by  his 
assiduity,  economy,  and  skill  increases  his  annual  revenue  by 
5000  francs.  If  the  state  claim  of  him  the  fifth  part  of  his 
augmented  income,  will  there  not  remain  4000  francs  of  increase 
to  stimulate  his  further  exertions?  " 

M.  Say  supposes,  "  A  landlord  by  his  assiduity,  economy,  and 
skill  to  increase  his  annual  revenue  by  5000  francs;  "  but  a 
landlord  has  no  means  of  employing  his  assiduity,  economy, 
and  skill  on  his  land  unless  he  farms  it  himself;  and  then  it  is 
in  quality  of  capitalist  and  farmer  that  he  makes  the  improve- 
ment, and  not  in  quality  of  landlord.  It  is  not  conceivable  that 
he  could  so  augment  the  produce  of  his  farm  by  any  peculiar 
skill  on  his  part,  without  first  increasing  the  quantity  of  capital 
employed  upon  it.  If  he  increased  the  capital,  his  larger  revenue 
might  bear  the  same  proportion  to  his  increased  capital,  as  the 
revenue  of  all  other  farmers  to  their  capitals. 

If  M.  Say's  suggestion  were  followed,  and  the  state  were  to 
claim  the  fifth  part  of  the  augmented  income  of  the  farmer,  it 
would  be  a  partial  tax  on  farmers,  acting  on  their  profits,  and 
not  affecting  the  profits  of  those  in  other  employments.  The 
tax  would  be  paid  by  all  lands,  by  those  which  yielded  scantily 
as  well  as  by  those  which  yielded  abundantly;    and  on  some 


I20  Political  Economy 

lands  there  could  be  no  compensation  for  it  by  deduction  from 
rent,  for  no  rent  is  paid.  A  partial  tax  on  profits  never  falls 
on  the  trade  on  which  it  is  laid,  for  the  trader  will  either  quit 
his  employment  or  remunerate  himself  for  the  tax.  Now,  those 
who  pay  no  rent  could  be  recompensed  only  by  a  rise  in  the 
price  of  produce,  and  thus  would  M.  Say's  proposed  tax  fall  on 
the  consumer,  and  not  either  on  the  landlord  or  farmer. 

If  the  proposed  tax  were  increased  in  proportion  to  the 
increased  quantity  or  value  of  the  gross  produce  obtained  from 
the  land,  it  would  differ  in  nothing  from  tithes,  and  would  equally 
be  transferred  to  the  consumer.  Whether  then  it  fell  on  the 
gross  or  on  the  net  produce  of  land,  it  would  be  equally  a  tax 
on  consumption,  and  would  only  affect  the  landlord  and  farmer 
in  the  same  way  as  other  taxes  on  raw  produce. 

If  no  tax  whatever  had  been  laid  on  the  land,  and  the  same 
sum  had  been  raised  by  any  other  means,  agriculture  would  have 
flourished  at  least  as  well  as  it  has  done;  for  it  is  impossible 
that  any  tax  on  land  can  be  an  encouragement  to  agriculture; 
a  moderate  tax  may  not,  and  probably  does  not,  greatly  prevent, 
but  it  cannot  encourage  production.  The  English  government 
has  held  no  such  language  as  M.  Say  has  supposed.  It  did  not 
promise  to  exempt  the  agricultural  class  and  their  successors 
from  all  future  taxation,  and  to  raise  the  further  supplies  which 
the  state  might  require  from  the  other  classes  of  society;  it 
said  only,  '*  in  this  mode  we  will  no  further  burthen  the  land; 
but  we  retain  to  ourselves  the  most  perfect  liberty  of  making 
you  pay,  under  some  other  form,  your  full  quota  to  the  future 
exigencies  of  the  state." 

Speaking  of  taxes  in  kind,  or  a  tax  of  a  certain  proportion  of 
the  produce,  which  is  precisely  the  same  as  tithes,  M.  Say  says, 
*'  This  mode  of  taxation  appears  to  be  the  most  equitable; 
there  is,  however,  none  which  is  less  so:  it  totally  leaves  out  of 
consideration  the  advances  made  by  the  producer;  it  is  pro- 
portioned by  the  gross,  and  not  to  the  net  revenue.  Two 
agriculturists  cultivate  different  kinds  of  raw  produce:  one 
cultivates  com  on  middling  land,  his  expenses  amounting 
annually  on  an  average  to  8000  francs;  the  raw  produce  from 
his  lands  sells  for  12,000  francs;  he  has  then  a  net  revenue  of 
4000  francs. 

*'  His  neighbour  has  pasture  or  wood  land,  which  brings  in 
every  year  a  like  sum  of  12,000  francs,  but  his  expenses  amount 
only  to  2000  francs.  He  has  therefore  on  an  average  a  net 
revenue  of  10,000  francs. 


Land-Tax  i  2 1 

"  A  law  ordains  that  a  twelfth  of  the  produce  of  all  the  fruits 
of  the  earth  be  levied  in  kind,  whatever  they  may  be.  From 
the  first  is  taken,  in  consequence  of  this  law,  corn  of  the  value 
of  1000  francs;  and  from  the  second,  hay,  cattle,  or  wood,  of 
the  same  value  of  1000  francs.  What  has  happened?  From 
the  one,  a  quarter  of  his  net  income,  4000  francs,  has  been 
taken;  from  the  other,  whose  income  was  10,000  francs,  a  tenth 
only  has  been  taken.  Income  is  the  net  profit  which  remains 
after  replacing  the  capital  exactly  in  its  former  state.  Has  a 
merchant  an  income  equal  to  all  the  sales  which  he  makes  in 
the  course  of  a  year;  certainly  not;  his  income  only  amounts 
to  the  excess  of  his  sales  above  his  advances,  and  it  is  on  this 
excess  only  that  taxes  on  income  should  fall." 

M.  Say's  error  in  the  above  passage  lies  in  supposing  that 
because  the  value  of  the  produce  of  one  of  these  two  farms,  atter 
reinstating  the  capital,  is  greater  than  the  value  of  the  produce 
of  the  other,  on  that  account  the  net  income  of  the  cultivators 
will  differ  by  the  same  amount.  The  net  income  of  the  land- 
lords and  tenants  together  of  the  wood  land  may  be  much 
greater  than  the  net  income  of  the  landlords  and  tenants  of  the 
corn  land ;  but  it  is  on  account  of  the  difference  of  rent,  and  not 
on  account  of  the  difference  in  the  rate  of  profit.  M.  Say  has 
wholly  omitted  the  consideration  of  the  different  amount  of 
rent  which  these  cultivators  would  have  to  pay.  There  cannot 
be  two  rates  of  profit  in  the  same  employment,  and  therefore 
when  the  value  of  produce  is  in  different  proportions  to  capital, 
it  is  the  rent  which  will  differ,  and  not  the  profit.  Upon  what 
pretence  would  one  man,  with  a  capital  of  2000  francs,  be 
allowed  to  obtain  a  net  profit  of  10,000  francs  from  its  employ- 
ment, whilst  another,  with  a  capital  of  8000  francs,  would  only 
obtain  4000  francs ?  Let  M.  Say  make  a  due  allowance  for  rent; 
let  him  further  allow  for  the  effect  which  such  a  tax  would  have 
on  the  prices  of  these  different  kinds  of  raw  produce,  and  he  will 
then  perceive  that  it  is  not  an  unequal  tax,  and,  further,  that 
the  producers  themselves  will  no  otherwise  contribute  to  it 
than  any  other  class  of  consumers. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

TAXES  ON   GOLD 

The  rise  in  the  price  of  commodities,  in  consequence  of  taxation 
or  of  difficulty  of  production,  will  in  all  cases  ultimately  ensue; 
but  the  duration  of  the  interval  before  the  market  price  will 
conform  to  the  natural  price  must  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
commodity,  and  on  the  facility  with  which  it  can  be  reduced  in 
quantity.  If  the  quantity  of  the  commodity  taxed  could  not 
be  diminished,  if  the  capital  of  the  farmer  or  of  the  hatter,  for 
instance,  could  not  be  withdrawn  to  other  employments,  it 
would  be  of  no  consequence  that  their  profits  were  reduced 
below  the  general  level  by  means  of  a  tax;  unless  the  demand 
for  their  commodities  should  increase,  they  would  never  be 
able  to  elevate  the  market  price  of  com  and  of  hats  up  to  their 
increased  natural  price.  Their  threats  to  leave  their  employ- 
ments, and  remove  their  capitals  to  more  favoured  trades, 
would  be  treated  as  an  idle  menace  which  could  not  be  carried 
into  effect;  and  consequently  the  price  would  not  be  raised  by 
diminished  production.  Commodities,  however,  of  all  descrip- 
tions, can  be  reduced  in  quantity,  and  capital  can  be  removed 
from  trades  which  are  less  profitable  to  those  which  are  more 
so,  but  with  different  degrees  of  rapidity.  In  proportion  as  the 
supply  of  a  particular  commodity  can  be  more  easily  reduced, 
without  inconvenience  to  the  producer,  the  price  of  it  will  more 
quickly  rise  after  the  difficulty  of  its  production  has  been 
increased  by  taxation,  or  by  any  other  means.  Com  being  a 
commodity  indispensably  necessary  to  every  one,  little  effect 
will  be  produced  on  the  demand  for  it  in  consequence  of  a  tax, 
and  therefore  the  supply  would  not  probably  be  long  excessive, 
even  if  the  producers  had  great  difficulty  in  removing  their 
capitals  from  the  land.  For  this  reason,  the  price  of  com  will 
speedily  be  raised  by  taxation,  and  the  farmer  will  be  enabled 
to  transfer  the  tax  from  himself  to  the  consumer. 

If  the  mines  which  supply  us  with  gold  were  in  this  country, 
and  if  gold  were  taxed,  it  could  not  rise  in  relative  value  to  oth 
things  till  its  quantity  were  reduced.     This  would   be  mor 
particularly  the  case  if  gold  were  used  exclusively  for  money 

122 


■4 


Taxes  on  Gold  123 

It  is  true  that  the  least  productive  mines,  those  which  paid  no 
rent,  could  no  longer  be  worked,  as  they  could  not  afford  the 
general  rate  of  profits  till  the  relative  value  of  gold  rose  by  a 
sum  equal  to  the  tax.  The  quantity  of  gold,  and,  therefore,  the 
quantity  of  money,  would  be  slowly  reduced:  it  would  be  a 
little  diminished  in  one  year,  a  little  more  in  another,  and 
finally  its  value  would  be  raised  in  proportion  to  the  tax;  but, 
in  the  interval,  the  proprietors  or  holders,  as  they  would  pay 
the  tax,  would  be  the  sufferers,  and  not  those  who  used  money. 
If  out  of  every  looo  quarters  of  wheat  in  the  country,  and  every 
1000  produced  in  future,  government  should  exact  loo  quarters 
as  a  tax,  the  remaining  900  quarters  would  exchange  for  the  same 
quantity  of  other  commodities  that  looo  did  before;  but  if 
the  same  thing  took  place  with  respect  to  gold,  if  of  every  £1000 
money  now  in  the  country,  or  in  future  to  be  brought  into  it, 
government  could  exact  £100  as  a  tax,  the  remaining  £900 
would  purchase  very  little  more  than  £900  purchased  before. 
The  tax  would  fall  upon  him  whose  property  consisted  of 
money,  and  would  continue  to  do  so  till  its  quantity  were 
reduced  in  proportion  to  the  increased  cost  of  its  production 
caused  by  the  tax. 

This,  perhaps,  would  be  more  particularly  the  case  with 
respect  to  a  metal  used  for  money  than  any  other  commodity; 
because  the  demand  for  money  is  not  for  a  definite  quantity, 
as  is  the  demand  for  clothes,  or  for  food.  The  demand  for 
money  is  regulated  entirely  by  its  value,  and  its  value  by  its 
quantity.  If  gold  were  of  double  the  value,  half  the  quantity 
would  perform  the  same  functions  in  circulation,  and  if  it  were 
of  half  the  value,  double  the  quantity  would  be  required.  If 
the  market  value  of  corn  be  increased  one-tenth  by  taxation, 
or  by  difficulty  of  production,  it  is  doubtful  whether  any  effect 
whatever  would  be  produced  on  the  quantity  consumed,  because 
every  man's  want  is  for  a  definite  quantity,  and,  therefore,  if 
he  has  the  means  of  purchasing,  he  will  continue  to  consume  as 
before:  but  for  money,  the  demand  is  exactly  proportioned  to 
its  value.  No  man  could  consume  twice  the  quantity  of  corn 
which  is  usually  necessary  for  his  support,  but  every  man 
purchasing  and  selling  only  the  same  quantity  of  goods  may  be 
obliged  to  employ  twice,  thrice,  or  any  number  of  times  the 
same  quantity  of  money. 

The  argument  which  I  have  just  been  using  applies  only  to 
those  states  of  society  in  which  the  precious  metals  are  used 
for  money,  and  where  paper  credit  is  not  established.    The 


124  Political  Economy 

metal  gold,  like  all  other  commodities,  has  its  value  in  the 
market  ultimately  regulated  by  the  comparative  facility  or 
difficulty  of  producing  it;  and  although,  from  its  durable 
nature,  and  from  the  difficulty  of  reducing  its  quantity,  it  does 
not  readily  bend  to  variations  in  its  market  value,  yet  that 
difficulty  is  much  increased  from  the  circumstance  of  its  being 
used  as  money.  If  the  quantity  of  gold  in  the  market  for  the 
purpose  of  commerce  only  were  10,000  ounces,  and  the  con- 
sumption in  our  manufactures  were  2000  ounces  annually,  it 
might  be  raised  one-fourth  or  25  per  cent,  in  its  value  in  one 
year  by  withholding  the  annual  supply;  but  if,  in  consequence 
of  its  being  used  as  money,  the  quantity  employed  were  100,000 
ounces,  it  would  not  be  raised  one-fourth  in  value  in  less  than 
ten  years.  As  money  made  of  paper  may  be  readily  reduced  in 
quantity,  its  value,  though  its  standard  were  gold,  would  be 
increased  as  rapidly  as  that  of  the  metal  itself  would  be  increased, 
if  the  metal,  by  forming  a  very  small  part  of  the  circulation,  had 
a  very  slight  connection  with  money. 

If  gold  were  the  produce  of  one  country  only,  and  it  were  used 
universally  for  money,  a  very  considerable  tax  might  be  imposed 
on  it,  which  would  not  fall  on  any  country,  except  in  proportion 
as  they  used  it  in  manufactures  and  for  utensils;  upon  that 
portion  which  was  used  for  money,  though  a  large  tax  might  be 
received,  nobody  would  pay  it.  This  is  a  quality  peculiar  to 
money.  All  other  commodities  of  which  there  exists  a  limited 
quantity,  and  which  cannot  be  increased  by  competition,  are 
dependent  for  their  value  on  the  tastes,  the  caprice,  and  the 
power  of  purchasers;  but  money  is  a  commodity  which  no 
country  has  any  wish  or  necessity  to  increase:  no  more  advan-, 
tage  results  from  using  twenty  millions  than  from  using 
millions  of  currency.  A  country  might  have  a  monopoly  01 
silk,  or  of  wine,  and  yet  the  prices  of  silks  and  wine  might  fall, 
because  from  caprice,  or  fashion,  or  taste,  cloth  and  brandy 
might  be  preferred  and  substituted;  the  same  effect  might 
in  a  degree  take  place  with  gold,  as  far  as  its  use  is  confined  to 
manufactures:  but  while  money  is  the  general  medium  of 
exchange,  the  demand  for  it  is  never  a  matter  of  choice,  but 
always  of  necessity:  you  must  take  it  in  exchange  for  your 
goods,  and,  therefore,  there  are  no  limits  to  the  quantity  which 
may  be  forced  on  you  by  foreign  trade  if  it  fall  in  value;  and 
no  reduction  to  which  you  must  not  submit  if  it  rise.  You 
may,  indeed,  substitute  paper  money,  but  by  this  you  do  not 
and  cannot  lessen  the  quantity  of  money,  for  that  is  regulated 


Taxes  on  Gold  1 25 

by  the  value  of  the  standard  for  which  it  is  exchangeable;  it  is 
only  by  the  rise  of  the  price  of  commodities  that  you  can  prevent 
them  from  being  exported  from  a  country  where  they  are 
purchased  with  little  money,  to  a  country  where  they  can  be 
sold  for  more,  and  this  rise  can  only  be  effected  by  an  importa- 
tion of  metallic  money  from  abroad,  or  by  the  creation  or 
addition  of  paper  money  at  home.  If,  then,  the  King  of  Spain, 
supposing  him  to  be  in  exclusive  possession  of  the  mines,  and 
gold  alone  to  be  used  for  money,  were  to  lay  a  considerable  tax* 
on  gold,  he  would  very  much  raise  its  natural  value;  and  as  its 
market  value  in  Europe  is  ultimately  regulated  by  its  natural 
value  in  Spanish  America,  more  commodities  would  be  given 
by  Europe  for  a  given  quantity  of  gold.  But  the  same  quantity 
of  gold  would  not  be  produced  in  America,  as  its  value  would 
only  be  increased  in  proportion  to  the  diminution  of  quantity 
consequent  on  its  increased  cost  of  production.  No  more  goods, 
then,  would  be  obtained  in  America  in  exchange  for  all  their 
gold  exported  than  before;  and  it  may  be  asked  where  then 
would  be  the  benefit  to  Spain  and  her  colonies?  The  benefit 
would  be  this,  that  if  less  gold  were  produced,  less  capital  would 
be  employed  in  producing  it;  the  same  value  of  goods  from 
Europe  would  be  imported  by  the  employment  of  the  smaller 
capital  that  was  before  obtained  by  the  employment  of  the 
larger;  and,  therefore,  all  tlie  productions  obtained  by  the 
employment  of  the  capital  withdrawn  from  the  mines  would 
be  a  benefit  which  Spain  would  derive  from  the  imposition  of  the 
tax,  and  which  she  could  not  obtain  in  such  abundance,  or  with 
such  certainty,  by  possessing  the  monopoly  of  any  other  com- 
modity whatever.  From  such  a  tax,  as  far  as  money  was 
concerned,  the  nations  of  Europe  would  suffer  no  injury  what- 
ever; they  would  have  the  same  quantity  of  goods,  and  conse- 
quently the  same  means  of  enjoyment  as  before,  but  these  goods 
would  be  circulated  with  a  less  quantity,  because  a  more  valuable 
money. 

If  in  consequence  of  the  tax  only  one-tenth  of  the  present 
quantity  of  gold  were  obtained  from  the  mines,  that  tenth  would 
be  of  equal  value  with  the  ten  tenths  now  produced.  But  the 
King  of  Spain  is  not  exclusively  in  possession  of  the  mines  of 
the  precious  metals;  and  if  he  were,  his  advantage  from  their 
possession,  and  the  power  of  taxation,  would  be  very  much 
reduced  by  the  limitation  of  demand  and  consumption  in 
Europe,  in  consequence  of  the  universal  substitution,  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree,  of  paper  money.    The  agreement  of  the 


1 


126  Political  Economy 

market  and  natural  prices  of  all  commodities  depends  at  al 
times  on  the  facility  with  which  the  supply  can  be  increased  or 
diminished.  In  the  case  of  gold,  houses,  and  labour,  as  well  as 
many  other  things,  this  effect  cannot,  under  some  circumstances, 
be  speedily  produced.  But  it  is  different  with  those  commo- 
dities which  are  consumed  and  reproduced  from  year  to  year, 
such  as  hats,  shoes,  com,  and  cloth;  they  may  be  reduced,  if 
necessary,  and  the  interval  cannot  be  long  before  the  supply  is 
contracted  in  proportion  to  the  increased  charge  of  producing 
them. 

A  tax  on  raw  produce  from  the  surface  of  the  earth  will,  as  we 
have  seen,  fall  on  the  consumer,  and  will  in  no  way  affect  rent; 
unless  by  diminishing  the  funds  for  the  maintenance  of  labour 
it  lowers  wages,  reduces  the  population,  and  diminishes  the 
demand  for  com.  But  a  tax  on  the  produce  of  gold  mines 
must,  by  enhancing  the  value  of  that  metal,  necessarily  reduce 
the  demand  for  it,  and  must  therefore  necessarily  displace 
capital  from  the  employment  to  which  it  was  applied.  Not- 
withstanding, then,  that  Spain  would  derive  all  the  benefits 
which  I  have  stated  from  a  tax  on  gold,  the  proprietors  of  those 
mines  from  which  capital  was  withdrawn  would  lose  all  their 
rent.  This  would  be  a  loss  to  individuals,  but  not  a  national 
loss;  rent  being  not  a  creation,  but  merely  a  transfer  of  wealth: 
the  King  of  Spain,  and  the  proprietors  of  the  mines  which  con- 
tinued to  be  worked,  would  together  receive,  not  only  all  that 
the  liberated  capital  produced,  but  all  that  the  other  proprietors 
lost.  ^1 

Suppose  the  mines  of  the  ist,  2nd,  and  3rd  quality  to  bfl 
worked,  and  to  produce  respectively  100,  80,  and  70  pounds 
weight  of  gold,  and  therefore  the  rent  of  No.  i  to  be  thirty 
pounds,  and  that  of  No.  2  ten  pounds.  Suppose,  now,  the  tax 
to  be  seventy  pounds  of  gold  per  annum  on  each  mine  worked ; 
and  consequently  that  No.  i  alone  could  be  profitably  worked, 
it  is  evident  that  all  rent  would  immediately  disappear.  Be- 
fore the  imposition  of  the  tax,  out  of  the  100  pounds  produced 
on  No.  I ,  a  rent  was  paid  of  thirty  pounds,  and  the  worker  of  the 
mine  retained  seventy,  a  sum  equal  to  the  produce  of  the  least 
productive  mine.  The  value,  then,  of  what  remains  to  the 
capitalist  of  the  mine  No.  i  must  be  the  same  as  before,  or  he 
would  not  obtain  the  common  profits  of  stock;  and,  conse- 
quently, after  paying  seventy  out  of  his  100  pounds  for  tax, 
the  value  of  the  remaining  thirty  must  be  as  great  as  the  value 
of  seventy  was  before,  and  therefore  the  value  of  the  whole 


'  Taxes  on  Gold  1 27 

-;  hundred  as  great  as  233  pounds  before.     Its  value  might  be 

:  higher,  but  it  could  not  be  lower,  or  even  this  mine  would  cease 

j  to   be   worked.     Being   a  monopolised   commodity,   it  could 

\  exceed  its  natural  value,  and  then  it  would  pay  a  rent  equal  to 

j  that  excess;  but  no  funds  would  be  employed  in  the  mine  if  it 

I  were  below  this  value.     In  return  for  one-third  of  the  labour 

i  and  capital  employed  in  the  mines,  Spain  would  obtain  as  much 

j  gold  as  would  exchange  for  the  same,  or  very  nearly  the  same, 

quantity  of  commodities  as  before.    She  would  be  richer  by 

the  produce  of  the  two-thirds  liberated  from  the  mines.     If 

the  value  of  the  100  pounds  of  gold  should  be  equal  to  that  of 

the  250  pounds  extracted  before,  the  King  of  Spain's  portion, 

his  seventy  pounds  would  be  equal  to  175  at  the  former  value:  a 

small  part  of  the  king's  tax  only  would  fall  on  his  own  subjects, 

the  greater  part  being  obtained  by  the  better  distribution  of 

capital. 

The  account  of  Spain  would  stand  thus: — 

FORMERLY  PRODUCED 

Gold,  250  pounds,  of  the  value  of  (suppose)       .  .  10,000  yards  of 

cloth. 

NOW  PRODUCED 

By  the  two  capitalists  who  quitted  the  mines,  the  \  ^^^  yards  of 

same  value  as   140  pounds  of  gold  formerly  ex-  j-  **        cloth 

changed  for;   equal  to  .....  j 

By  the  capitalist  who  works  the  mine,  No.  i,  thirty  \  vards  of 

pounds  of  gold,  increased  in  value,  as  1  to  2  J,  and  V  ^        Jj^^j^ 

therefore  now  of  the  value  of        ....  J 

Tax  to  the  king,  seventy  pounds,  increased  also  in  )  7000  yards  of 

value  as  i  to  2 J,  and  therefore  now  of  the  value  of  J       cloth. 

15,600 

Of  the  7000  received  by  the  king,  the  people  of  Spain  would  con- 
tribute only  1400,  and  5600  would  be  pure  gain,  effected  by  the 
liberated  capital. 

If  the  tax,  instead  of  being  a  fixed  sum  per  mine  worked, 
were  a  certain  portion  of  its  produce,  the  quantity  would  not  be 
immediately  reduced  in  consequence.  If  a  half,  a  fourth,  or 
a  third  of  each  mine  were  taken  for  the  tax,  it  would  neverthe- 
less be  the  interest  of  the  proprietors  to  make  their  mines  yield 
as  abundantly  as  before;  but  if  the  quantity  were  not  reduced, 
but  only  a  part  of  it  transferred  from  the  proprietor  to  the  king, 
its  value  would  not  rise;  the  tax  would  fall  on  the  people  of 
the  colonies,  and  no  advantage  would  be  gained.  A  tax  of  this 
kind  would  have  the  effect  that  Adam  Smith  supposes  taxes 
on  raw  produce  would  have  on  the  rent  of  land — it  would  fall 


128  Political  Economy 

entirely  on  the  rent  of  the  mine.  If  pushed  a  little  further, 
indeed,  the  tax  would  not  only  absorb  the  whole  rent,  but  would 
deprive  the  worker  of  the  mine  of  the  common  profits  of  stock, 
and  he  would  consequently  withdraw  his  capital  from  the  pro- 
duction of  gold.  If  still  further  extended,  the  r  mt  of  still  better 
mines  would  be  absorbed,  and  capital  would  oe  further  with- 
drawn; and  thus  the  quantity  would  be  continually  reduced, 
and  its  value  raised,  and  the  same  effects  would  take  place  as 
we  have  already  pointed  out;  a  part  of  the  tax  would  be  paid 
by  the  people  of  the  Spanish  colonies,  and  the  other  part  would 
be  a  new  creation  of  produce,  by  increasing  the  power  of  the 
instrument  used  as  a  medium  of  exchange. 

Taxes  on  gold  are  of  two  kinds,  one  on  the  actual  quantity  of 
gold  in  circulation,  the  other  on  the  quantity  that  is  annually 
produced  from  the  mines.  Both  have  a  tendency  to  reduce  the 
quantity  and  to  raise  the  value  of  gold;  but  by  neither  will  its 
value  be  raised  till  the  quantity  is  reduced,  and  therefore  such 
taxes  will  fall  for  a  time,  until  the  supply  is  diminished,  on  the 
proprietors  of  money,  but  ultimately  that  part  which  will 
permanently  fall  on  the  community  will  be  paid  by  the  owner 
of  the  mine  in  the  reduction  of  rent,  and  by  the  purchasers  of 
that  portion  of  gold  which  is  used  as  a  commodity  contributing 
to  the  enjoyments  of  mankind,  and  not  set  apart  exclusively 
for  a  circulating  medium. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

1^  TAXES    ON    HOUSES 

There  are  also  other  commodities  besides  gold  which  cannot  be 
speedily  reduced  in  quantity;  any  tax  on  which  will  therefore 
fall  on  the  proprietor  if  the  increase  of  price  should  lessen  the 
demand. 

Taxes  on  houses  are  of  this  description;  though  laid  on  the 
occupier,  they  will  frequently  fall  by  a  diminution  of  rent  on 
the  landlord.  The  produce  of  the  land  is  consumed  and  repro- 
duced from  year  to  year,  and  so  are  many  other  commodities ; 
as  they  may  therefore  be  speedily  brought  to  a  level  with  the 
demand,  they  cannot  long  exceed  their  natural  price.  But  as 
a  tax  on  houses  may  be  considered  in  the  light  of  an  additional 
rent  paid  by  the  tenant,  its  tendency  will  be  to  diminish  the 
demand  for  houses  of  the  same  annual  rent  without  diminishing 
their  supply.  Rent  will  therefore  fall,  and  a  part  of  the  tax 
that  will  be  paid  indirectly  by  the  landlord. 

"  The  rent  of  a  house,"  says  Adam  Smith,  "  may  be  dis- 
tinguished into  two  parts,  of  which  the  one  may  very  properly 
be  called  the  building  rent,  the  other  is  commonly  called  the 
ground  rent.  The  building  rent  is  the  interest  or  profit  of  the 
capital  expended  in  building  the  house.  In  order  to  put  the 
trade  of  a  builder  upon  a  level  with  other  trades,  it  is  necessary 
that  this  rent  should  be  sufficient  first  to  pay  the  same  interest 
which  he  would  have  got  for  his  capital  if  he  had  lent  it  upon 
good  security;  and,  secondly,  to  keep  the  house  in  constant 
repair,  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  to  replace  within  a 
certain  term  of  years  the  capital  which  had  been  employed  in 
building  it."  "  If,  in  proportion  to  the  interest  of  money,  the 
trade  of  the  builder  affords  at  any  time  a  much  greater  profit 
than  this,  it  will  soon  draw  so  much  capital  from  other  trades 
as  will  reduce  the  profit  to  its  proper  level.  If  it  affords  at  any 
time  much  less  than  this,  other  trades  will  soon  draw  so  much 
capital  from  it  as  will  again  raise  that  profit.  Whatever  part 
of  the  whole  rent  of  a  house  is  over  and  above  what  is  sufficient 
for  affording  this  reasonable  profit,  naturally  goes  to  the  ground 
rent;  and  where  the  ov/ner  of  the  ground,  and  the  owner  of  the 

129  I 


130  Political  Economy 

building,  are  two  different  persons,  it  is  in  most  cases  completely 
paid  to  the  former.  In  country  houses,  at  a  distance  from  any 
great  town,  where  there  is  a  plentiful  choice  of  ground,  the 
ground  rent  is  scarcely  anything,  or  no  more  than  what  the  space 
upon  which  the  house  stands  would  pay  employed  in  agriculture. 
In  country  villas,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  some  great  town, 
it  is  sometimes  a  good  deai  higher,  and  the  peculiar  conveniens y, 
or  beauty  of  situation,  is  there  frequently  very  highly  paid  for. 
Ground  rents  are  generally  highest  in  the  capital,  and  in  those 
particular  parts  of  it  where  there  happens  to  be  the  greatest 
demand  for  houses,  whatever  be  the  reason  for  that  demand, 
whether  for  trade  and  business,  for  pleasure  and  society,  or  for 
mere  vanity  and  fashion."  A  tax  on  the  rent  of  houses  may 
either  fall  on  the  occupier,  on  the  ground  landlord,  or  on  the 
building  landlord.  In  ordinary'  cases  it  may  be  presumed  that 
the  whole  tax  would  be  paid,  both  immediately  and  finally,  by 
the  occupier. 

If  the  tax  be  moderate,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  country 
such  that  it  is  either  stationary  or  advancing,  there  would  be 
little  motive  for  the  occupier  of  a  house  to  content  himself  with 
one  of  a  worse  description.  But  if  the  tax  be  high,  or  any  other 
circumstances  should  diminish  the  demand  for  houses,  the 
landlord's  income  would  fall,  for  the  occupier  would  be  partly 
compensated  for  the  tax  by  a  diminution  of  rent.  It  is,  how- 
ever, difficult  to  say  in  what  proportions  that  part  of  the  tax, 
which  was  saved  by  the  occupier  by  a  fall  of  rent,  would  fall  on 
the  building  rent  and  the  ground  rent.  It  is  probable  that,  in 
the  first  instance,  both  would  be  affected;  but  as  houses  are, 
though  slowly,  yet  certainly  perishable,  and  as  no  more  would 
be  built  till  the  profits  of  the  builder  were  restored  to  the  general 
level,  building  rent  would,  after  an  interval,  be  restored  to  its 
natural  price.  As  the  builder  receives  rent  only  whilst  the 
building  endures,  he  could  pay  no  part  of  the  tax,  under  the 
most  disastrous  circumstances,  for  any  longer  period. 

The  payment  of  this  tax,  then,  would  ultimately  fall  on  the 
occupier  and  ground  landlord,  but,  "  in  what  proportion  this 
final  payment  would  be  divided  between  them,"  says  Adam 
Smith,  "  it  is  not  perhaps  very  easy  to  ascertain.  The  division 
would  probably  be  very  different  in  different  circumstances, 
and  a  tax  of  this  kind  might,  according  to  those  different  cir- 
cumstances, affect  very  unequally  both  the  inhabitant  of  the 
house  and  the  owner  of  the  ground."  ^ 
*  Book  V.  chap.  ii. 


Taxes  on  Houses  1 3 1 

Adam  Smith  considers  ground  rents  as  peculiarly  fit  subjects 
for  taxation.  "  Both  ground  rents  and  the  ordinary  rent  of 
land/'  he  says,  "  are  a  species  of  revenue,  which  the  owner  in 
many  cases  enjoys  without  any  care  or  attention  of  his  own. 
Though  a  part  of  this  revenue  should  be  taken  from  him,  in  order 
to  defray  the  expenses  of  the  state,  no  discouragement  will 
thereby  be  given  to  any  sort  of  industry.  The  annual  produce 
of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  society,  the  real  wealth  and  revenue 
of  the  great  body  of  the  people,  might  be  the  same  after  such  a 
tax  as  before.  Ground  rents  and  the  ordinary  rent  of  land  are, 
therefore,  perhaps,  the  species  of  revenue  which  can  best  bear 
to  have  a  peculiar  tax  imposed  upon  them."  It  must  be 
admitted  that  the  effects  of  these  taxes  would  be  such  as  Adam 
Smith  has  described;  but  it  would  surely  be  very  unjust  to 
tax  exclusively  the  revenue  of  any  particular  class  of  a  com- 
munity. The  burdens  of  the  state  should  be  borne  by  all  in 
proportion  to  their  means:  this  is  one  of  the  four  maxims 
mentioned  by  Adam  Smith  which  should  govern  all  taxation. 
Rent  often  belongs  to  those  who,  after  many  years  of  toil,  have 
realised  their  gains  and  expended  their  fortunes  in  the  purchase 
of  land  or  houses;  and  it  certainly  would  be  an  infringement 
of  that  principle  which  should  ever  be  held  sacred,  the  security 
of  property,  to  subject  it  to  unequal  taxation.  It  is  to  be 
lamented  that  the  duty  by  stamps,  with  which  the  transfer  of 
landed  property  is  loaded,  materially  impedes  the  conveyance 
of  it  into  those  hands  where  it  would  probably  be  made  most 
productive.  And  if  it  be  considered  that  land,  regarded  as  a 
fit  subject  for  exclusive  taxation,  would  not  only  be  reduced  in 
price,  to  compensate  for  the  risk  of  that  taxation,  but  in  pro- 
portion to  the  indefinite  nature  and  uncertain  value  of  the  risk 
would  become  a  fit  subject  for  speculations,  partaking  more 
of  the  nature  of  gambling  than  of  sober  trade,  it  will  appear 
probable  that  the  hands  into  which  land  would  in  that  case  be 
most  apt  to  fall  would  be  the  hands  of  those  who  possess  more 
of  the  qualities  of  the  gambler  than  of  the  qualities  of  the  sober- 
minded  proprietor,  who  is  likely  to  employ  his  land  to  the 
greatest  advantage. 


CHAPTER  XV 

TAXES   ON   PROFITS 

Taxes  on  those  commodities  which  are  generally  denominated 
luxuries  fall  on  those  only  who  make  use  of  them.  A  tax  on 
wine  is  paid  by  the  consumer  of  wine.  A  tax  on  pleasure 
horses,  or  on  coaches,  is  paid  by  those  who  provide  for  them- 
selves such  enjoyments,  and  in  exact  proportion  as  they  provide 
them.  But  taxes  on  necessaries  do  not  affect  the  consumers 
of  necessaries  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  that  may  be  con- 
sumed by  them,  but  often  in  a  much  higher  proportion.  A  tax 
on  corn,  we  have  observed,  not  only  affects  a  manufacturer  in 
the  proportion  that  he  and  his  family  may  consume  corn,  but 
it  alters  the  rate  of  profits  of  stock,  and  therefore  also  affects 
his  income.  Whatever  raises  the  wages  of  labour,  lowers  the 
profits  of  stock;  therefore  every  tax  on  any  commodity  con- 
sumed by  the  labourer  has  a  tendency  to  lower  the  rate  of  profits. 

A  tax  on  hats  will  raise  the  price  of  hats;  a  tax  on  shoes,  the 
price  of  shoes;  if  this  were  not  the  case,  the  tax  would  be  finally 
paid  by  the  manufacturer;  his  profits  would  be  reduced  below 
the  general  level,  and  he  would  quit  his  trade.  A  partial  tax 
on  profits  will  raise  the  price  of  the  commodity  on  which  it  fall^ 
a  tax,  for  example,  on  the  profits  of  the  hatter  would  raise  tl 
price  of  hats;  for  if  his  profits  were  taxed,  and  not  those  of  an^ 
other  trade,  his  profits,  unless  he  raised  the  price  of  his  hat 
would  be  below  the  general  rate  of  profits,  and  he  would  qui^ 
his  employment  for  another. 

In  the  same  manner,  a  tax  on  the  profits  of  the  farmer  woulc 
raise  the  price  of  corn;  a  tax  on  the  profits  of  the  clothier,  th( 
price  of  cloth;  and  if  a  tax  in  proportion  to  profits  were  laid  on' 
all  trades,  every  commodity  would  be  raised  in  price.  But  if 
the  mine  which  supplied  us  with  the  standard  of  our  money 
were  in  this  country,  and  the  profits  of  the  miner  were  also 
taxed,  the  price  of  no  commodity  would  rise,  each  man  would 
give  an  equal  proportion  of  his  income,  and  everything  would 
be  as  before. 

If  money  be  not  taxed,  and  therefore  be  permitted  to  pre- 
serve its  value,  whilst  everything  else  is  taxed  and  is  raised  in 

132 


Taxes  on  Profits  1 3  3 

value,  the  hatter,  the  farmer,  and  clothier,  each  employing  the 
same  capitals,  and  obtaining  the  same  profits,  will  pay  the  same 
amount  of  tax.  If  the  tax  be  £ioo,  the  hats,  the  cloth,  and  the 
corn  will  each  be  increased  in  value  £ioo.  If  the  hatter  gains  by 
his  hats  £1100,  instead  of  £1000,  he  will  pay  £100  to  government 
for  the  tax;  and  therefore  will  still  have  £1000  to  lay  out  on 
goods  for  his  own  consumption.  But  as  the  cloth,  corn,  and  all 
other  commodities  will  be  raised  in  price  from  the  same  cause, 
he  will  not  obtain  more  for  his  £1000  than  he  before  obtained  for 
£910,  and  thus  will  he  contribute  by  his  diminished  expenditure 
to  the  exigencies  of  the  state;  he  will,  by  the  payment  of  the 
tax,  have  placed  a  portion  of  the  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  the  country  at  the  disposal  of  government,  instead  of  using 
that  portion  himself.  If,  instead  of  expending  his  £1000,  he 
adds  it  to  his  capital,  he  will  find  in  the  rise  of  wages,  and  in  the 
increased  cost  of  the  raw  material  and  machinery,  that  his 
saving  of  £1000  does  not  amount  to  more  than  a  saving  of  £910 
amounted  to  before. 

If  money  be  taxed,  or  if  by  any  other  cause  its  value  be  altered, 
and  all  commodities  remain  precisely  at  the  same  price  as  before, 
the  profits  of  the  manufacturer  and  farmer  will  also  be  the  same 
as  before,  they  will  continue  to  be  £1000;  and  as  they  will  each 
have  to  pay  £100  to  government,  they  will  retain  only  £900, 
which  will  give  them  a  less  command  over  the  produce  of  the 
land  and  labour  of  the  country,  whether  they  expend  it  in 
productive  or  unproductive  labour.  Precisely  what  they  lose, 
government  will  gain.  In  the  first  case,  the  contributor  to  the 
tax  woul^,  for  £1000,  have  as  great  a  quantity  of  goods  as  he 
before  had  for  £910;  in  the  second,  he  would  have  only  as  much 
as  he  before  had  for  £900,  for  the  price  of  goods  would  remain 
unaltered,  and  he  would  have  only  £900  to  expend.  This 
proceeds  from  the  difference  in  the  amount  of  the  tax;  in  the 
first  case,  it  is  only  an  eleventh  of  his  income;  in  the  second, 
it  is  a  tenth ;  money  in  the  two  cases  being  of  a  different  value. 

But  although,  if  money  be  not  taxed,  and  do  not  alter  in  value, 
all  commodities  will  rise  in  price,  they  will  not  rise  in  the  same 
proportion;  they  will  not  after  the  tax  bear  the  same  relative 
value  to  each  other  which  they  did  before  the  tax.  In  a  former 
part  of  this  work  we  discussed  the  effects  of  the  division  of 
capital  into  fixed  and  circulating,  or  rather  into  durable  and 
perishable  capital,  on  the  prices  of  commodities.  We  showed 
that  two  manufacturers  might  employ  precisely  the  same 
amount  of  capital,  and  might  derive  from  it  precisely  the  same 


134  Political  Economy 

amount  of  profits,  but  that  they  would  sell  their  commodities 
for  very  different  sums  of  money,  according  as  the  capitals  they 
employed  were  rapidly,  or  slowly,  consumed  and  reproduced. 
The  one  might  sell  his  goods  for  £4000,  the  other  for  £10,000, 
and  they  might  both  employ  £10,000  of  capital,  and  obtain 
20  per  cent,  profit,  or  £2000.  The  capital  of  one  might  consist, 
for  example,  of  £2000  circulating  capital,  to  be  reproduced, 
and  £8000  fixed,  in  buildings  and  machinery;  the  capital  of  the 
other,  on  the  contrary,  might  consist  of  £8000  of  circulating, 
and  of  only  £2000  fixed  capital  in  machinery  and  buildings. 
Now,  if  each  of  these  persons  were  to  be  taxed  10  per  cent,  on 
his  income,  or  £200,  the  one  to  make  his  business  yield  him  the 
general  rate  of  profit  must  raise  his  goods  from  £10,000  to 
£10,200;  the  other  would  also  be  obliged  to  raise  the  price  of 
his  goods  from  £4000  to  £4200.  Before  the  tax,  the  goods  sold 
by  one  of  these  manufacturers  were  2^  times  more  valuable 
than  the  goods  of  the  other;  after  the  tax  they  will  be  2.42 
times  more  valuable:  the  one  kind  will  have  risen  two  per 
cent. :  the  other  five  per  cent. :  consequently  a  tax  upon  income, 
whilst  money  continued  unaltered  in  value,  would  alter  the 
relative  prices  and  value  of  commodities.  This  would  be  true 
also  if  the  tax,  instead  of  being  laid  on  the  profits,  were  laid  on 
the  commodities  themselves:  provided  they  were  taxed  in 
proportion  to  the  value  of  the  capital  employed  on  their  pro- 
duction, they  would  rise  equally,  whatever  might  be  their 
value,  and  therefore  they  would  not  preserve  the  same  propor- 
tion as  before.  A  commodity  which  rose  from  ten  to  eleven 
thousand  pounds  would  not  bear  the  same  relation  tas  before 
to  another  which  rose  from  £2000  to  £3000.  If,  under  these 
circumstances,  money  rose  in  value,  from  whatever  cause  it 
might  proceed,  it  would  not  affect  the  prices  of  commodities  in 
the  same  proportion.  The  same  cause  which  would  lower  the 
price  of  one  from  £10,200  to  £10,000  or  less  than  two  per  cent., 
would  lower  the  price  of  the  other  from  £4200  to  £4000  or 
4|  per  cent.  If  they  fell  in  any  different  proportion,  profits 
would  not  be  equal;  for  to  make  them  equal,  when  the  price 
of  the  first  commodity  was  £10,000,  the  price  of  the  second 
should  be  £4000;  and  when  the  price  of  the  first  was  £10,200, 
the  price  of  the  other  should  be  £4200. 

The  consideration  of  this  fact  will  lead  to  the  understanding 
of  a  very  important  principle,  which,  I  believe,  has  never  been 
adverted  to.  It  is  this  :  that  in  a  country  where  no  taxation 
subsists,  the  alteration  in  the  value  of  money  arising  from 


1 

ties   ^' 


I 


Taxes  on  Profits  135 

scarcity  or  abundance  will  operate  in  an  equal  proportion  on 
the  prices  of  all  commodities;  that  if  a  commodity  of  £1000 
value  rise  to  £1200,  or  fall  to  £800,  a  commodity  of  £10,000 
value  will  rise  to  £12,000  or  fall  to  £8000;  but  in  a  country 
where  prices  are  artificially  raised  by  taxation,  the  abundance 
of  money  from  an  influx,  or  the  exportation  and  consequent 
scarcity  of  it  from  foreign  demand,  will  not  operate  in  the  same 
proportion  on  the  prices  of  all  commodities;  some  it  will  raise 
or  lower  5,  6,  or  12  per  cent.,  others  3,  4,  or  7  per  cent.  If  a 
country  were  not  taxed,  and  money  should  fall  in  value,  its 
abundance  in  every  market  would  produce  similar  effects  in 
each.  If  meat  rose  20  per  cent.,  bread,  beer,  shoes,  labour,  and 
every  commodity  would  also  rise  20  per  cent.;  it  is  necessary 
they  should  do  so,  to  secure  to  each  trade  the  same  rate  of 
profits.  But  this  is  no  longer  true  when  any  of  these  commo- 
dities is  taxed;  if,  in  that  case,  they  should  all  rise  in  propor- 
tion to  the  fall  in  the  value  of  money,  profits  would  be  rendered 
unequal;  in  the  case  of  the  commodities  taxed,  profits  would 
be  raised  above  the  general  level,  and  capital  would  be  removed 
from  one  employment  to  another,  till  an  equilibrium  of  profits 
was  restored,  which  could  only  be  after  the  relative  prices  were 
altered. 

Will  not  this  principle  account  for  the  different  effects,  which 
it  was  remarked  were  produced  on  the  prices  of  commodities 
from  the  altered  value  of  money  during  the  bank-restriction? 
It  was  objected  to  those  who  contended  that  the  currency  was 
at  that  period  depreciated,  from  the  too  great  abundance  of 
the  paper  circulation,  that,  if  that  were  the  fact,  all  commodities 
ought  to  have  risen  in  the  same  proportion;  but  it  was  found 
that  many  had  varied  considerably  more  than  others,  and 
thence  it  was  inferred  that  the  rise  of  prices  was  owing  to  some- 
thing affecting  the  value  of  commodities,  and  not  to  any  altera- 
tion in  the  value  of  the  currency.  It  appears,  however,  as  we 
have  just  seen,  that  in  a  country  where  commodities  are  taxed, 
they  will  not  all  vary  in  price  in  the  same  proportion,  either  in 
consequence  of  a  rise  or  of  a  fall  in  the  value  of  currency. 

If  the  profits  of  all  trades  were  taxed,  excepting  the  profits 
of  the  farmer,  all  goods  would  rise  in  money  value,  excepting 
raw  produce.  The  farmer  would  have  the  same  corn  income 
as  before,  and  would  sell  his  corn  also  for  the  same  money  price; 
but  as  he  would  be  obliged  to  pay  an  additional  price  for  all 
the  commodities,  except  com,  which  he  consumed,  it  would  be 
to  him  a  tax  on  expenditure.     Nor  would  he  be  relieved  from 


136  Political  Economy 

this  tax  by  an  alteration  in  the  value  of  money,  for  an  alteration 
in  the  value  of  money  might  sink  all  the  taxed  commodities  to 
their  former  price,  but  the  untaxed  one  would  sink  below  its 
former  level;  and,  therefore,  though  the  farmer  would  purchase 
his  commodities  at  the  same  price  as  before,  he  would  have  less 
money  with  which  to  purchase  them. 

The  landlord,  too,  would  be  precisely  in  the  same  situation; 
he  would  have  the  same  corn,  and  the  same  money-rent  as 
before,  if  all  commodities  rose  in  price  and  money  remained  at 
the  same  value;  and  he  would  have  the  same  com,  but  a  less 
money-rent,  if  all  commodities  remained  at  the  same  price:  so 
that  in  either  case,  though  his  income  were  not  directly  taxed, 
he  would  indirectly  contribute  towards  the  money  raised. 

But  suppose  the  profits  of  the  farmer  to  be  also  taxed,  he 
then  would  be  in  the  same  situation  as  other  traders:  his  raw 
produce  would  rise,  so  that  he  would  have  the  same  money 
revenue,  after  paying  the  tax,  but  he  would  pay  an  additional 
price  for  all  the  commodities  he  consumed,  raw  produce  included. 

His  landlord,  however,  would  be  differently  situated;  he 
would  be  benefited  by  the  tax  on  his  tenant's  profits,  as  he 
would  be  compensated  for  the  additional  price  at  which  he 
would  purchase  his  manufactured  commodities,  if  they  rose  in 
price;  and  he  would  have  the  same  money  revenue,  if,  in 
consequence  of  a  rise  in  the  value  of  money,  commodities  sold 
at  their  former  price.  A  tax  on  the  profits  of  the  farmer  is  not 
a  tax  proportioned  to  the  gross  produce  of  the  land,  but  to  its 
net  produce,  after  the  payment  of  rent,  wages,  and  all  other 
charges.  As  the  cultivators  of  the  different  kinds  of  land. 
No,  I,  2,  and  3,  employ  precisely  the  same  capitals,  they  will 
get  precisely  the  same  profits,  whatever  may  be  the  quantity 
of  gross  produce  which  one  may  obtain  more  than  the  other; 
and  consequently  they  will  be  all  taxed  alike.  Suppose  the 
gross  produce  of  the  land  of  the  quality  of  No.  i  to  be  180  qrs., 
that  of  No.  2,  170  qrs.,  and  of  No.  3,  160,  and  each  to  be  taxed 
10  quarters,  the  difference  between  the  produce  of  No.  i,  No.  2, 
and  No.  3,  after  paying  the  tax,  will  be  the  same  as  before; 
for  if  No.  I  be  reduced  to  170,  No.  2  to  160,  and  No.  3  to  150  qrs., 
the  difference  between  3  and  i  will  be  as  before,  20  qrs.;  and 
of  No.  3  and  No.  2, 10  qrs.  If,  after  the  tax,  the  prices  of  com 
and  of  every  other  commodity  should  remain  the  same  as 
before,  money  rent,  as  well  as  corn  rent,  would  continue  unal- 
tered; but  if  the  price  of  corn  and  every  other  comm.odity 
should  rise  in  consequence  of  the  tax,  money  rent  will  also  rise 


tr^^^^^^ 


i 


Taxes  on  Profits  137 

in  the  same  proportion.  If  the  price  of  com  were  £4  per  quarter, 
the  rent  of  No.  i  would  be  £80,  and  that  of  No.  2,  £40;  but  if 
corn  rose  five  per  cent.,  or  to  £4  4^.,  rent  would  also  rise  five 
per  cent.,  for  twenty  quarters  of  corn  would  then  be  worth  £84, 
and  ten  quarters  £42 ;  so  that  in  every  case  the  landlord  will  be 
unaffected  by  such  a  tax.  A  tax  on  the  profits  of  stock  always 
leaves  corn  rent  unaltered,  and  therefore  money  rent  varies 
with  the  price  of  com;  but  a  tax  on  raw  produce,  or  tithes, 
never  leaves  corn  rent  unaltered,  but  generally  leaves  money 
rent  the  same  as  before.  In  another  part  of  this  work  I  have 
observed  that  if  a  land-tax  of  the  same  money  amount  were 
laid  on  every  kind  of  land  in  cultivation,  without  any  allowance 
for  difference  of  fertility,  it  would  be  very  unequal  in  its  opera- 
tion, as  it  would  be  a  profit  to  the  landlord  of  the  more  fertile 
lands.  It  would  raise  the  price  of  corn  in  proportion  to  the 
burden  borne  by  the  farmer  of  the  worst  land;  but  this  addi- 
tional price  being  obtained  for  the  greater  quantity  of  produce 
yielded  by  the  better  land,  farmers  of  such  land  would  be 
benefited  during  their  leases,  and  afterwards  the  advantage 
would  go  to  the  landlord  in  the  form  of  an  increase  of  rent. 
The  effect  of  an  equal  tax  on  the  profits  of  the  farmer  is  precisely 
the  same;  it  raises  the  money  rent  of  the  landlords  if  money 
retains  the  same  value;  but  as  the  profits  of  all  other  trades 
are  taxed  as  well  as  those  of  the  farmer,  and  consequently  the 
prices  of  all  goods,  as  well  as  corn,  are  raised,  the  landlord  loses 
as  much  by  the  increased  money  price  of  the  goods  and  com 
on  which  his  rent  is  expended,  as  he  gains  by  the  rise  of  his  rent. 
If  m.oney  should  rise  in  value,  and  all  things  should,  after  a  tax 
on  the  profits  of  stock,  fall  to  their  former  prices,  rent  also 
would  be  the  same  as  before.  The  landlord  would  receive  the 
same  money  rent,  and  would  obtain  all  the  commodities  on 
which  it  was  expended  at  their  former  price;  so  that  under  all 
circumstances  he  would  continue  untaxed.^ 

This  circumstance  is  curious.  By  taxing  the  profits  of  the 
farmer  you  do  not  burthen  him  more  than  if  you  exempted  his 
profits  from  the  tax,  and  the  landlord  has  a  decided  interest 
that  his  tenants'  profits  should  be  taxed,  as  it  is  only  on  that 
condition  that  he  himself  continues  really  untaxed. 

A  tax  on  the  profits  of  capital  would  also  affect  the  stock- 

^  That  the  profits  of  the  farmer  only  should  be  taxed,  and  not  the  profits 
of  any  other  capitalist,  would  be  highly  beneficial  to  landlords.  It  would, 
in  fact,  be  a  tax  on  the  consumers  of  raw  produce,  partly  for  the  benefit 
of  the  state,  and  partly  for  the  benefit  of  landlords. 


5  tol^^ 


138  Political  Economy 

holder,  if  all  commodities  were  to  rise  in  proportion  to  the  tax 
although  his  dividends  continued  untaxed;  but  if,  from  the 
alteration  in  the  value  of  money,  all  commodities  were  to  sink 
to  their  former  price,  the  stock-holder  would  pay  nothing 
towards  the  tax;  he  would  purchase  all  his  commodities  at  the 
same  price,  but  would  still  receive  the  same  money  dividend. 

If  it  be  agreed  that  by  taxing  the  profits  of  one  manufacturer 
only,  the  price  of  his  goods  would  rise,  to  put  him  on  an  equality 
with  all  other  manufacturers ;  and  that  by  taxing  the  profits  of 
two  manufacturers  the  prices  of  two  descriptions  of  goods  must 
rise,  I  do  not  see  how  it  can  be  disputed  that  by  taxing  the 
profits  of  all  manufacturers  the  prices  of  all  goods  would  rise, 
provided  the  mine  which  supplied  us  with  money  were  in  this 
country  and  continued  untaxed.  But  as  money,  or  the  stan- 
dard of  money,  is  a  commodity  imported  from  abroad,  the 
prices  of  all  goods  could  not  rise;  for  such  an  effect  could  not 
take  place  without  an  additional  quantity  of  money ,^  which 
could  not  be  obtained  in  exchange  for  dear  goods,  as  was  shown 
in  page  60.  If,  however,  such  a  rise  could  take  place,  it  could 
not  be  permanent,  for  it  would  have  a  powerful  influence  on 
foreign  trade.  In  return  for  commodities  imported,  those  dear 
goods  could  not  be  exported,  and  therefore  we  should  for  a 
time  continue  to  buy,  although  we  ceased  to  sell;  and  should 
export  money,  or  bullion,  till  the  relative  prices  of  commodities 
were  nearly  the  same  as  before.  It  appears  to  me  absolutely 
certain  that  a  well  regulated  tax  on  profits  would  ultimately 
restore  commodities,  both  of  home  and  foreign  manufacture, 
to  the  same  money  price  which  they  bore  before  the  tax  was 
imposed. 

As  taxes  on  raw  produce,  tithes,  taxes  on  wages,  and  on 

*  On  further  consideration,  I  doubt  whether  any  more  money  would  be 
required  to  circulate  the  same  quantity  of  commodities  if  their  prices  be 
raised  by  taxation  and  not  by  difficulty  of  production.  Suppose  100,000 
nuarters  of  com  to  be  sold  in  a  certain  district,  and  in  a  certain  time,  at 
^4  per  quarter,  and  that  in  consequence  of  a  direct  tax  of  85.  per  quarter, 
corn  rises  to  £4  85.,  the  same  quantity  of  money,  I  think,  and  no  more, 
would  be  required  to  circulate  this  corn  at  the  increased  price.  If  I  before 
purchased  11  quarters  at  £4,  and,  in  consequence  of  the  tax,  am  obliged  to 
reduce  my  consumption  to  10  quarters,  I  shall  not  require  more  money, 
for  in  all  cases  I  shall  pay  £44  for  my  corn.  The  public  would,  in  fact, 
consume  one-eleventh  less,  and  this  quantity  would  be  consumed  by 
government.  The  money  necessary  to  purchase  it  would  be  derived  from 
the  8s.  per  quarter,  to  be  received  from  the  farmers  in  the  shape  of  a  tax, 
but  the  amount  levied  would  at  the  same  time  be  paid  to  them  for  their 
corn;  therefore  the  tax  is  in  fact  a  tax  in  kind,  and  does  not  make  it 
necessary  that  any  more  money  should  be  used,  or,  if  any,  so  little  that 
the  quantity  may  be  safely  neglected. 


i 


I 


Taxes  on  Profits  139 

the  necessaries  of  the  labourer  will,  by  raising  wages,  lower 
profits,  they  will  all,  though  not  in  an  equal  degree,  be  attended 
with  the  same  effects. 

The  discovery  of  machinery,  which  materially  improves  home 
manufactures,  always  tends  to  raise  the  relative  value  of  money, 
and  therefore  to  encourage  its  importation.  All  taxation,  all 
increased  impediments,  either  to  the  manufacturer  or  the  grower 
of  commodities,  tend,  on  the  contrary,  to  lower  the  relative 
value  of  money,  and  therefore  to  encourage  its  exportation. 


CHAPTER  XVI 


TAXES    ON     WAGES 


Taxes  on  wages  will  raise  wages,  and  therefore  will  diminish 
the  rate  of  the  profits  of  stock.  We  have  already  seen  that  a 
tax  on  necessaries  will  raise  their  prices,  and  will  be  followed 
by  a  rise  of  wages.  The  only  difference  between  a  tax  on 
necessaries  and  a  tax  on  wages  is,  that  the  former  will  neces- 
sarily be  accompanied  by  a  rise  in  the  price  of  necessaries,  but 
the  latter  will  not;  towards  a  tax  on  wages,  consequently, 
neither  the  stockholder,  the  landlord,  nor  any  other  class  but 
the  employers  of  labour  will  contribute.  A  tax  on  wages  is 
wholly  a  tax  on  profits ;  a  tax  on  necessaries  is  partly  a  tax  on 
profits  and  partly  a  tax  on  rich  consumers.  The  ultimate  effects 
which  will  result  from  such  taxes,  then,  are  precisely  the  same 
as  those  which  result  from  a  direct  tax  on  profits. 

*'  The  wages  of  the  inferior  classes  of  workmen,"  says  Adam 
Smith,  "  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  in  the  first  book,  are  every- 
where necessarily  regulated  by  two  different  circumstances — 
the  demand  for  labour  and  the  ordinary  or  average  price  of 
provisions.  The  demand  for  labour,  according  as  it  happens 
to  be  either  increasing,  stationary,  or  declining,  or  to  require 
an  increasing,  stationary,  or  declining  population,  regulates  the 
subsistence  of  the  labourer,  and  determines  in  what  degree  if 
shall  be  either  liberal,  moderate,  or  scanty.  The  ordinary  or 
average  price  of  provisions  determines  the  quantity  of  money 
which  must  be  paid  to  the  workmen,  in  order  to  enable  him, 
one  year  with  another,  to  purchase  this  liberal,  moderate,  or 
scanty  subsistence.  While  the  demand  for  labour  and  the  price 
of  provisions,  therefore,  remain  the  sam.e,  a  direct  tax  upon  the 
wages  of  labour  can  have  no  other  effect  than  to  raise  them 
somewhat  higher  than  the  tax.'' 

To  the  proposition,  as  it  is  here  advanced  by  Dr.  Smith,  Mr. 
Buchanan  offers  two  objections.  First,  he  denies  that  the 
money  wages  of  labour  are  regulated  by  the  price  of  provisions ; 
and  secondly,  he  denies  that  a  tax  on  the  wages  of  labour  would 
raise  the  price  of  labour.  On  the  first  point  Mr.  Buchanan's 
page  59:  "  The  wages  of  labour,  it  has 
140 


argument  is  as  follows 


Taxes  on  Wages  141 

already  been  remarked,  consist  not  in  money,  but  in  what 
money  purchases,  namely,  provisions  and  other  necessaries; 
and  the  allowance  of  the  labourer  out  of  the  common  stock  will 
always  be  in  proportion  to  the  supply.  Where  provisions  are 
cheap  and  abundant,  his  share  will  be  the  larger;  and  where 
they  are  scarce  and  dear,  it  will  be  the  less.  His  wages  will 
always  give  him  his  just  share,  and  they  cannot  give  him  more. 
It  is  an  opinion,  indeed,  adopted  by  Dr.  Smith  and  most  other 
writers,  that  the  money  price  of  labour  is  regulated  by  the 
money  price  of  provisions,  and  that,  when  provisions  rise  in 
price,  wages  rise  in  proportion.  But  it  is  clear  that  the  price 
of  labour  has  no  necessary  connection  with  the  price  of  food, 
since  it  depends  entirely  on  the  supply  of  labourers  compared 
with  the  demand.  Besides,  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the  high 
price  of  provisions  is  a  certain  indication  of  a  deficient  supply, 
and  arises  in  the  natural  course  of  things  for  the  purpose  of 
retarding  the  consumption.  A  smaller  supply  of  food,  shared 
among  the  same  number  of  consumers,  will  evidently  leave  a 
smaller  portion  to  each,  and  the  labourer  must  bear  his  share  of 
the  common  want.  To  distribute  this  burden  equally,  and  to 
prevent  the  labourer  from  consuming  subsistence  so  freely  as 
before,  the  price  rises.  But  wages,  it  seems,  must  rise  along 
with  it,  that  he  may  still  use  the  same  quantity  of  a  scarcer 
commodity;  and  thus  nature  is  represented  as  counteracting 
her  own  purposes; — first,  raising  the  price  of  food  to  diminish 
the  consumption,  and  afterwards  raising  wages  to  give  the 
labourer  the  same  supply  as  before." 

In  this  argument  of  Mr.  Buchanan,  there  appears  to  me  to 
be  a  great  mixture  of  truth  and  error.  Because  a  high  price  of 
provisions  is  sometimes  occasioned  by  a  deficient  supply,  Mr. 
Buchanan  assumes  it  as  a  certain  indication  of  deficient  supply. 
He  attributes  to  one  cause  exclusively  that  which  may  arise 
from  many.  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that,  in  the  case  of  a  defi- 
cient supply,  a  smaller  quantity  will  be  shared  among  the  same 
number  of  consumers,  and  a  smaller  portion  will  fall  to  each. 
To  distribute  this  privation  equally,  and  to  prevent  the  labourer 
from  consuming  subsistence  so  freely  as  before,  the  price  rises. 
It  must,  therefore,  be  conceded  to  Mr.  Buchanan  that  any  rise 
in  the  price  of  provisions  occasioned  by  a  deficient  supply  will 
not  necessarily  raise  the  money  wages  of  labour  as  the  con- 
sumption must  be  retarded,  which  can  only  be  effected  by 
diminishing  the  power  of  the  consumers  to  purchase.  But, 
because  the  price  of  provisions  is  raised  by  a  deficient  supply, 


142  Political  Economy 

we  are  by  no  means  warranted  in  concluding,  as  Mr.  Buchanan 
appears  to  do,  that  there  may  not  be  an  abundant  supply  with 
a  high  price;   not  a  high  price  with  regard  to  money  only,  but^ 
with  regard  to  all  other  things.  fl 

The  natural  price  of  commodities,  which  always  ultimately" 
governs  their  market  price,  depends  on  the  facility  of  produc- 
tion; but  the  quantity  produced  is  not  in  proportion  to  that 
facility.  Although  the  lands  which  are  now  taken  into  cultiva- 
tion are  much  inferior  to  the  lands  in  cultivation  three  centuries 
ago,  and  therefore  the  difficulty  of  production  is  increased,  who 
can  entertain  any  doubt  but  that  the  quantity  produced  now 
very  far  exceeds  the  quantity  then  produced?  Not  only  is  a 
high  price  compatible  with  an  increased  supply,  but  it  rarely 
fails  to  accompany  it.  If,  then,  in  consequence  of  taxation,  or 
of  difficulty  of  production,  the  price  of  provisions  be  raised  and 
the  quantity  be  not  diminished,  the  money  wages  of  labour  will 
rise;  for,  as  Mr.  Buchanan  has  justly  observed,  "  The  wages  of 
labour  consist  not  in  money,  but  in  what  money  purchases, 
namely,  provisions  and  other  necessaries ;  and  the  allowance  of 
the  labourer  out  of  the  common  stock  will  always  be  in  propor- 
tion to  the  supply." 

With  respect  to  the  second  point,  whether  a  tax  on  the  wages 
of  labour  would  raise  the  price  of  labour,  Mr.  Buchanan  says, 
"  After  the  labourer  has  received  the  fair  recompense  of  his 
labour,  how  can  he  have  recourse  on  his  employer  for  what  he 
is  afterwards  compelled  to  pay  away  in  taxes?  There  is  no 
law  or  principle  in  human  affairs  to  warrant  such  a  conclusion. 
After  the  labourer  has  received  his  wages,  they  are  in  his  own 
keeping,  and  he  must,  as  far  as  he  is  able,  bear  the  burden  of 
whatever  exactions  he  may  ever  afterwards  be  exposed  to:  for 
he  has  clearly  no  way  of  compelling  those  to  reimburse  him 
who  have  already  paid  him  the  fair  price  of  his  work."  Mr. 
Buchanan  has  quoted,  with  great  approbation,  the  following 
able  passage  from  Mr.  Malthus's  work  on  population,  which 
appears  to  me  completely  to  answer  his  objection.  "  The  price  w 
of  labour,  when  left  to  find  its  natural  level,  is  a  most  important  m 
political  barometer,  expressing  the  relation  between  the  supply  . 
of  provisions  and  the  demand  for  them,  between  the  quantity 
to  be  consumed  and  the  number  of  consumers;  and,  taken  on 
the  average,  independently  of  accidental  circumstances,  it 
further  expresses,  clearly,  the  wants  of  the  society  respecting 
population ;  that  is,  whatever  may  be  the  number  of  children  to 
a  marriage  necessary  to  maintain  exactly  the  present  popula- 


I 


Taxes  on  Wages  143 

tion,  the  price  of  labour  will  be  just  sufficient  to  support  this 
number,  or  be  above  it,  or  below  it,  according  to  the  state  of 
the  real  funds  for  the  maintenance  of  labour,  whether  stationary, 
progressive,  or  retrograde.  Instead,  however,  of  considering  it 
in  this  light,  we  consider  it  as  something  which  we  may  raise  or 
depress  at  pleasure,  something  which  depends  principally  on 
his  majesty's  justices  of  the  peace.  When  an  advance  in  the 
price  of  provisions  already  expresses  that  the  demand  is  too 
great  for  the  supply,  in  order  to  put  the  labourer  in  the  same 
condition  as  before,  we  raise  the  price  of  labour,  that  is,  we 
increase  the  demand,  and  are  then  much  surprised  that  the  price 
of  provisions  continues  rising.  In  this,  we  act  much  in  the 
same  manner  as  if,  when  the  quicksilver  in  the  common  weather- 
glass stood  at  stormy,  we  were  to  raise  it  by  some  forcible  pressure 
to  settled  fair,  and  then  be  greatly  astonished  that  it  continued 
raining." 

"  The  price  of  labour  will  express  clearly  the  wants  of  the 
society  respecting  population;  "  it  will  be  just  sufficient  to  sup- 
port the  population,  which  at  that  time  the  state  of  the  funds 
for  the  maintenance  of  labourers  requires.  If  the  labourer's 
wages  were  before  only  adequate  to  supply  the  requisite  popu- 
lation, they  will,  after  the  tax,  be  inadequate  to  that  supply, 
for  he  will  not  have  the  same  funds  to  expend  on  his  family. 
Labour  will  therefore  rise,  because  the  demand  continues,  and 
it  is  only  by  raising  the  price  that  the  supply  is  not  checked. 

Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  see  hats  or  malt  rise  when 
taxed;  they  rise  because  the  requisite  supply  would  not  be 
afforded  if  they  did  not  rise:  so  with  labour,  when  wages  are 
taxed,  its  price  rises,  because,  if  it  did  not,  the  requisite  popula- 
tion would  not  be  kept  up.  Does  not  Mr.  Buchanan  allow  all 
that  is  contended  for,  when  he  says  that  "  were  he  (the  labourer) 
indeed  reduced  to  a  bare  allowance  of  necessaries,  he  would 
then  suffer  no  further  abatement  of  his  wages,  as  he  could  not 
on  such  conditions  continue  his  race?  "  Suppose  the  circum- 
stances of  the  country  to  be  such  that  the  lowest  labourers  are 
not  only  called  upon  to  continue  their  race,  but  to  increase  it; 
their  wages  would  be  regulated  accordingly.  Can  they  multiply 
in  the  degree  required  if  a  tax  takes  from  them  a  part  of  their 
wages,  and  reduces  them  to  bare  necessaries? 

It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  a  taxed  commodity  will  not  rise 
in  proportion  to  the  tax  if  the  demand  for  it  diminish  and  if 
the  quantity  cannot  be  reduced.  If  metallic  money  were  in 
general  use,  its  value  would  not  for  a  considerable  time  be 


»  -eov  ml 


144  Political  Economy 

increased  by  a  tax,  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  the  tax, 
because  at  a  higher  price  the  demand  would  be  diminished  and 
the  quantity  would  not  be  diminished ;  and  unquestionably  the 
same  cause  frequently  influences  the  wages  of  labour;  the 
number  of  labourers  cannot  be  rapidly  increased  or  diminished 
in  proportion  to  the  increase  or  diminution  of  the  fund  which  is 
to  employ  them;  but  in  the  case  supposed,  there  is  no  necessar}' 
diminution  of  demand  for  labour,  and  if  diminished,  the  demand 
does  not  abate  in  proportion  to  the  tax.  Mr.  Buchanan  forgets 
that  the  fund  raised  by  the  tax  is  employed  by  government  in 
maintaining  labourers,  unproductive  indeed,  but  still  labourers. 
If  labour  were  not  to  rise  when  wages  are  taxed,  there  would 
be  a  great  increase  in  the  competition  for  labour,  because  the 
owners  of  capital,  who  would  have  nothing  to  pay  towards  such 
a  tax,  would  have  the  same  funds  for  employing  labour;  whilst 
the  government  who  received  the  tax  would  have  an  additional 
fund  for  the  same  purpose.  Government  and  the  people  thus 
become  competitors,  and  the  consequence  of  their  competition 
is  a  rise  in  the  price  of  labour.  The  same  number  of  men  only 
will  be  employed,  but  they  will  be  employed  at  additional 
wages. 

If  the  tax  had  been  laid  at  once  on  the  people  of  capital,  their 
fund  for  the  maintenance  of  labour  would  have  been  diminished 
in  the  very  same  degree  that  the  fund  of  government  for  that 
purpose  had  been  increased;  and  therefore  there  would  have 
been  no  rise  in  wages;  for  though  there  would  be  the  same 
demand,  there  would  not  be  the  same  competition.  If  when 
the  tax  were  levied  government  at  once  exported  the  produce 
of  it  as  a  subsidy  to  a  foreign  state,  and  if  therefore  these  funds 
were  devoted  to  the  maintenance  of  foreign  and  not  of  English 
labourers,  such  as  soldiers,  sailors,  etc.,  etc.;  then,  indeed,  there 
would  be  a  diminished  demand  for  labour,  and  wages  might  not 
increase  although  they  were  taxed ;  but  the  same  thing  would 
happen  if  the  tax  had  been  laid  on  consumable  commodities,  on 
the  profits  of  stock,  or  if  in  any  other  manner  the  same  sum  had 
been  raised  to  supply  this  subsidy:  less  labour  could  be  employed 
at  home.  In  one  case  wages  are  prevented  from  rising,  in  the 
other  they  must  absolutely  fall.  But  suppose  the  amount  of 
a  tax  on  wages  were,  after  being  raised  on  the  labourers,  paid 
gratuitously  to  their  employers,  it  would  increase  their  money 
fund  for  the  maintenance  of  labour,  but  it  would  not  increase 
either  commodities  or  labour.  It  would  consequently  increase 
the  competition  amongst  the  employers  of  labour,  and  the  tax 


I 


Taxes  on  Wages  145 

would  be  ultimately  attended  with  no  loss  either  to  master  or 
labourer.  The  master  would  pay  an  increased  price  for  labour; 
the  addition  which  the  labourer  received  would  be  paid  as  a 
tax  to  government,  and  would  be  again  returned  to  the  masters. 
It  must,  however,  not  be  forgotten  that  the  produce  of  taxes 
is  generally  wastefully  expended,  they  are  always  obtained  at 
the  expense  of  the  people's  comforts  and  enjoyments,  and 
commonly  either  diminish  capital  or  retard  its  accumulation. 
By  diminishing  capital  they  tend  to  diminish  the  real  fund 
destined  for  the  maintenance  of  labour;  and  therefore  to 
diminish  the  real  demand  for  it.  Taxes,  then,  generally,  as 
far  as  they  impair  the  real  capital  of  the  country,  diminish  the 
demand  for  labour,  and  therefore  it  is  a  probable,  but  not  a 
necessary  nor  a  peculiar  consequence  of  a  tax  on  wages,  that 
though  wages  would  rise,  they  would  not  rise  by  a  sum  precisely 
equal  to  the  tax. 

Adam  Smith,  as  we  have  seen,  has  fully  allowed  that  the  effect 
of  a  tax  on  wages  would  be  to  raise  wages  by  a  sum  at  least 
equal  to  the  tax,  and  would  be  finally,  if  not  immediately,  paid 
by  the  employer  of  labour.  Thus  far  we  fully  agree;  but  we 
essentially  differ  in  our  views  of  the  subsequent  operation  of 
such  a  tax. 

"  A  direct  tax  upon  the  wages  of  labour,  therefore,"  says 
Adam  Smith,  '*  though  the  labourer  might  perhaps  pay  it  out 
of  his  hand,  could  not  properly  be  said  to  be  even  advanced  by 
him;  at  least  if  the  demand  for  labour  and  the  average  price 
of  provisions  remained  the  same  after  the  tax  as  before  it.  In 
all  such  cases,  not  only  the  tax  but  something  more  than  the 
tax  would  in  reality  be  advanced  by  the  person  who  immedi- 
ately employed  him.  The  final  payment  would  in  different 
cases  fall  upon  different  persons.  The  rise  which  such  a  tax 
might  occasion  in  the  wages  of  manufacturing  labour  would 
be  advanced  by  the  master  manufacturer,  who  would  be  entitled 
and  obliged  to  charge  it  with  a  profit  upon  the  price  of  his  goods. 
The  rise  which  such  a  tax  might  occasion  in  country  labour 
would  be  advanced  by  the  farmer,  who,  in  order  to  maintain 
the  same  number  of  labourers  as  before,  would  be  obliged  to 
employ  a  greater  capital.  In  order  to  get  back  this  greater 
capital,  together  with  the  ordinary  profits  of  stock,  it  would  be 
necessary  that  he  should  retain  a  larger  portion,  or  what  comes 
to  the  same  thing,  the  price  of  a  larger  portion,  of  the  produce 
of  the  land,  and  consequently  that  he  should  pay  less  rent  to  the 
landlord.     The  final  payment  of  this  rise  of  wages  would  in  this 

K 


146  Political  Economy 

case  fall  upon  the  landlord,  together  with  the  additional  profits 
of  the  farmer  who  had  advanced  it.  In  all  cases,  a  direct  tax  upon 
the  wages  of  labour  must,  in  the  long  run,  occasion  both  a  greater 
reduction  in  the  rent  of  land  and  a  greater  rise  in  the  price  of 
manufactured  goods  than  would  have  followed  from  the  proper 
assessment  of  a  sum  equal  to  the  produce  of  the  tax  partly  upon 
the  rent  of  land  and  partly  upon  consumable  commodities." 
Vol.  iii.  p.  337.  In  this  passage  it  is  asserted  that  the  additional 
wages  paid  by  farmers  will  ultimately  fall  on  the  landlords,  who 
will  receive  a  diminished  rent;  but  that  the  additional  wages 
paid  by  manufacturers  will  occasion  a  rise  in  the  price  of  manu- 
factured goods,  and  will  therefore  fall  on  the  consumers  of  those 
commodities. 

Now,  suppose  a  society  to  consist  of  landlords,  manufacturers, 
farmers,  and  labourers,  the  labourers,  it  is  agreed,  would  be 
recompensed  for  the  tax; — but  by  whom? — who  would  pay 
that  portion  which  did  not  fall  on  the  landlords? — the  manu- 
facturers could  pay  no  part  of  it;  for  if  the  price  of  their  commo- 
dities should  rise  in  proportion  to  the  additional  wages  they 
paid,  they  would  be  in  a  better  situation  after  than  before  the 
tax.  If  the  clothier,  the  hatter,  the  shoemaker,  etc.,  should 
be  each  able  to  raise  the  price  of  their  goods  10  per  cent. — 
supposing  10  per  cent,  to  recompense  them  completely  for  the 
additional  wages  they  paid — if,  as  Adam  Smith  says,  **  they 
would  be  entitled  and  obliged  to  charge  the  additional  wages 
with  a  profit  upon  the  price  of  their  goods,"  they  could  each 
consume  as  much  as  before  of  each  other's  goods,  and  therefore 
they  would  pay  nothing  towards  the  tax.  If  the  clothier  paid 
more  for  his  hats  and  shoes,  he  would  receive  more  for  his  cloth, 
and  if  the  hatter  paid  more  for  his  cloth  and  shoes,  he  would 
receive  more  for  his  hats.  All  manufactured  commodities,  then, 
would  be  bought  by  them  with  as  much  advantage  as  before, 
and  inasmuch  as  corn  would  not  be  raised  in  price,  which  is 
Dr.  Smith's  supposition,  whilst  they  had  an  additional  sum  to 
lay  out  upon  its  purchase,  they  would  be  benefited  but  not] 
injured  by  such  a  tax. 

If,  then,  neither  the  labourers  nor  the  manufacturers  would 
contribute  towards  such  a  tax;  if  the  farmers  would  be  also 
recompensed  by  a  fall  of  rent,  landlords  alone  must  not  only] 
bear  its  whole  weight,  but  they  must  also  contribute  to  the! 
increased  gains  of  the  manufacturers.  To  do  this,  however,] 
they  should  consume  all  the  manufactured  commodities  in  th< 
country,  for  the  additional  price  charged  on  the  whole  mass  is 


Taxes  on  Wages  147 

little  more  than  the  tax  originally  imposed  on  the  labourers  in 
manufactures. 

Now,  it  will  not  be  disputed  that  the  clothier,  the  hatter,  and 
all  other  manufacturers  are  consumers  of  each  other's  goods; 
it  will  not  be  disputed  that  labourers  of  all  descriptions  consume 
soap,  cloth,  shoes,  candles,  and  various  other  commodities; 
it  is  therefore  impossible  that  the  whole  weight  of  these  taxes 
should  fall  on  landlords  only. 

But  if  the  labourers  pay  no  part  of  the  tax,  and  yet  manu- 
factured commodities  rise  in  price,  wages  must  rise,  not  only  to 
compensate  them  for  the  tax,  but  for  the  increased  price  of 
manufactured  necessaries,  which,  as  far  as  it  affects  agricultural 
labour,  will  be  a  new  cause  for  the  fall  of  rent;  and,  as  far  as  it 
affects  manufacturing  labour,  for  a  further  rise  in  the  price  of 
goods.  This  rise  in  the  price  of  goods  will  again  operate  on 
wages,  and  the  action  and  re-action,  first  of  wages  on  goods,  and 
then  of  goods  on  wages,  will  be  extended  without  any  assignable 
limits.  The  arguments  by  which  this  theory  is  supported  lead 
to  such  absurd  conclusions  that  it  may  at  once  be  seen  that  the 
principle  is  wholly  indefensible. 

All  the  effects  which  are  produced  on  the  profits  of  stock  and 
the  wages  of  labour  by  a  rise  of  rent  and  a  rise  of  necessaries,  in 
the  natural  progress  of  society  and  increasing  difficulty  of  pro- 
duction, will  equally  follow  from  a  rise  of  wages  in  consequence 
of  taxation;  and,  therefore,  the  enjoyments  of  the  labourer,  as 
well  as  those  of  his  employers,  will  be  curtailed  by  the  tax;  and 
not  by  this  tax  particularly,  but  by  every  other  which  should 
raise  an  equal  amount,  as  they  would  all  tend  to  diminish  the 
fund  destined  for  the  maintenance  of  labour. 

The  error  of  Adam  Smith  proceeds  in  the  first  place  from  sup- 
posing that  all  taxes  paid  by  the  farmer  must  necessarily  fall  on 
the  landlord  in  the  shape  of  a  deduction  from  rent.  On  this 
subject  I  have  explained  myself  most  fully,  and  I  trust  that  it 
has  been  shown,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  reader,  that  since 
much  capital  is  employed  on  the  land  which  pays  no  rent,  and 
since  it  is  the  result  obtained  by  this  capital  which  regulates  the 
price  of  raw  produce,  no  deduction  can  be  made  from  rent;  and, 
consequently,  either  no  remuneration  will  be  made  to  the  farmer 
for  a  tax  on  wages,  or  if  made,  it  must  be  made  by  an  addition 
to  the  price  of  raw  produce. 

If  taxes  press  unequally  on  the  farmer,  he  will  be  enabled  to 
raise  the  price  of  raw  produce,  to  place  himself  on  a  level  with 
those  who  carry  on  other  trades;   but  a  tax  on  wages,  which 


1 

traael 


148  Political  Economy 

would  not  affect  him  more  than  it  would  affect  any  other 
could  not  be  removed  or  compensated  by  a  high  price  of  raw 
produce;  for  the  same  reason  which  should  induce  him  to  raise 
the  price  of  corn,  namely,  to  remunerate  himself  for  the  tax, 
would  induce  the  clothier  to  raise  the  price  of  cloth,  the  shoe- 
maker, hatter,  and  upholsterer  to  raise  the  price  of  shoes,  hats, 
and  furniture. 

If  they  could  all  raise  the  price  of  their  goods  so  as  to  remu- 
nerate themselves,  with  a  profit,  for  the  tax:  as  they  are  all 
consumers  of  each  other's  commodities,  it  is  obvious  that  the 
tax  could  never  be  paid;  for  who  would  be  the  contributors  if 
all  were  compensated? 

I  hope,  then,  that  I  have  succeeded  in  showing  that  any  tax 
which  shall  have  the  effect  of  raising  wages  will  be  paid  by  a 
diminution  of  profits,  and,  therefore,  that  a  tax  on  wages  is  in 
fact  a  tax  on  profits. 

This  principle  of  the  division  of  the  produce  of  labour  and 
capital  between  wages  and  profits,  which  I  have  attempted  to 
establish,  appears  to  me  so  certain,  that  excepting  in  the  imme- 
diate effects,  I  should  think  it  of  little  importance  whether  the 
profits  of  stock  or  the  wages  of  labour,  were  taxed.     By  taxing 
the  profits  of  stock  you  would  probably  alter  the  rate  at  which 
the  funds  for  the  maintenance  of  labour  increase,  and  wages 
would  be  disproportioned  to  the  state  of  that  fund,  by  being  too 
high.     By  taxing  wages,  the  reward  paid  to  the  labourer  would 
also  be  disproportioned  to  the  state  of  that  fund,  by  being  t* 
low.    In  the  one  case  by  a  fall,  and  in  the  other  by  a  rise 
money  wages,   the   natural   equilibrium   between   profits   and 
wages  would  be  restored.     A  tax  on  wages,  then,  does  not  fal 
on  the  landlord,  but  it  falls  on  the  profits  of  stock:    it  does  no 
*'  entitle  and  oblige  the  master  manufacturer  to  charge  it  wi 
a  profit  on  the  prices  of  his  goods,"  for  he  will  be  unable  t 
increase  their  price,  and  therefore  he  must  himself  wholly  ani 
without  compensation  pay  such  a  tax.^ 

If  the  effect  of  taxes  on  wages  be  such  as  I  have  described,' 
they  do  not  merit  the  censure  cast  upon  them  by  Dr.  Smith 
He  observes  of  such  taxes,  "  These,  and  some  other  taxes  of  th 
same  kind,  by  raising  the  price  of  labour,  are  said  to  have  ruine 

^  M.  Say  appears  to  have  imbibed  the  general  opinion  on  this  subject. 
Speaking  of  com,  he  saySj  "  thence  it  results  that  its  price  influences  the 
price  of  all  other  commodities.  A  farmer,  a  manufacturer,  or  a  merchant 
employs  ascertain  number  of  workmen  who  all  have  occasion  to  consume 
a  certain  quantity  of  corn.  If  the  price  of  corn  rises,  he  is  obhged  to  raisej 
in  an  equal  proportion,  the  price  of  his  production." — Vol.  i.  p.  255. 


mT 


Taxes  on  Wages  149 

the  greater  part  of  the  manufactures  of  Holland.  Similar  taxes, 
though  not  quite  so  heavy,  take  place  in  the  Milanese,  in  the 
states  of  Genoa,  in  the  duchy  of  Modena,  in  the  duchies  of 
Parma,  Placentia,  and  Guastalla,  and  in  the  ecclesiastical  states. 
A  French  author  of  some  note  has  proposed  to  reform  the 
finances  of  his  country  by  substituting  in  the  room  of  other 
taxes  this  most  ruinous  of  all  taxes.  '  There  is  nothing  so 
absurd,'  says  Cicero,  *  which  has  not  sometimes  been  asserted 
by  some  philosophers.'  "  And  in  another  place  he  says :  "  Taxes 
upon  necessaries,  by  raising  the  wages  of  labour,  necessarily 
tend  to  raise  the  price  of  all  manufactures,  and  consequently 
to  diminish  the  extent  of  their  sale  and  consumption."  They 
would  not  merit  this  censure,  even  if  Dr.  Smith's  principle  were 
correct,  that  such  taxes  would  enhance  the  prices  of  manufac- 
tured commodities ;  for  such  an  effect  could  be  only  temporary, 
and  would  subject  us  to  no  disadvantage  in  our  foreign  trade. 
If  any  cause  should  raise,  the  price  of  a  few  manufactured 
commodities,  it  would  prevent  or  check  their  exportation;  but 
if  the  same  cause  operated  generally  on  all,  the  effect  would 
be  merely  nominal,  and  would  neither  interfere  with  their 
relative  value,  nor  in  any  degree  diminish  the  stimulus  to  a 
trade  of  barter,  which  all  commerce,  both  foreign  and  domestic, 
really  is. 

I  have  already  attempted  to  show  that  when  any  cause  raises 
the  prices  of  all  commodities  the  effects  are  nearly  similar  to  a 
fall  in  the  value  of  money.  If  money  falls  in  value  all  com- 
modities rise  in  price;  and  if  the  effect  is  confined  to  one  country, 
it  will  affect  its  foreign  commerce  in  the  same  way  as  a  high 
price  of  commodities  caused  by  general  taxation;  and,  there- 
fore, in  examining  the  effects  of  a  low  value  of  money  confined 
to  one  country,  we  are  also  examining  the  effects  of  a  high  price 
of  commodities  confined  to  one  country.  Indeed,  Adam  Smith 
was  fully  aware  of  the  resemblance  between  these  two  cases,  and 
consistently  maintained  that  the  low  value  of  money,  or,  as  he 
calls  it,  of  silver  in  Spain,  in  consequence  of  the  prohibition 
against  its  exportation,  was  very  highly  prejudicial  to  the  manu- 
factures and  foreign  commerce  of  Spain.  *'  But  that  degrada- 
tion in  the  value  of  silver,  which  being  the  effect  either  of  the 
peculiar  situation,  or  of  the  political  institutions  of  a  particular 
country,  takes  place  only  in  that  country,  is  a  matter 
great  consequence,  which,  far  from  tending  to  mala 
really  richer,  tends  to  make  everybody  really  p^ 
rise  til  the  money  price  of  all  commodities,  which  W^fjkis  case^ 


^ 


150  Political  Economy 

peculiar  io  that  country,  tends  to  discourage  more  or  less  every 
sort  of  industry  which  is  carried  on  within  it,  and  to  enable 
foreign  nations,  by  furnishing  almost  all  sorts  of  goods  for  a 
smaller  quantity  of  silver  than  its  own  workmen  can  afford  to  do, 
to  undersell  them  not  only  in  the  foreign  but  even  in  the  home 
market."     Vol.  ii.  p.  278. 

One,  and  I  think  the  only  one,  of  the  disadvantages  of  a  low 
value  of  silver  in  a  country,  proceeding  from  a  forced  abundance, 
has  been  ably  explained  by  Dr.  Smith.  If  the  trade  in  gold 
and  silver  were  free,  "  the  gold  and  silver  which  would  go  abroad 
would  not  go  abroad  for  nothing,  but  would  bring  back  an  equal 
value  of  goods  of  some  kind  or  another.  Those  goods,  too, 
would  not  be  all  matters  of  mere  luxury'  and  expense  to  be 
consumed  by  idle  people,  who  produce  nothing  in  return  for 
their  consumption.  As  the  real  wealth  and  revenue  of  idle 
people  would  not  be  augmented  by  this  extraordinary  exporta- 
tion of  gold  and  silver,  so  would  neither  their  consumption  be 
augmented  by  it.  Those  goods  would — probably  the  greater 
part  of  them,  and  certainly  some  part  of  them — consist  in 
materials,  tools,  and  provisions,  for  the  employment  and  main- 
tenance of  industrious  people,  who  would  reproduce  with  a  profit 
the  full  value  of  their  consumption.  A  part  of  the  dead  stock 
of  the  society  would  thus  be  turned  into  active  stock,  and  would 
put  into  motion  a  greater  quantity  of  industry  than  had  been 
employed  before." 

By  not  allowing  a  free  trade  in  the  precious  metals  when  the 
prices  of  commodities  are  raised,  either  by  taxation,  or  by  the 
influx  of  the  precious  metals,  you  prevent  a  part  of  the  dead 
stock  of  the  society  from  being  turned  into  active  stock — you 
prevent  a  greater  quantity  of  industry  from  being  employed. 
But  this  is  the  whole  amount  of  the  evil — an  evil  never  felt  by 
those  countries  where  the  exportation  of  silver  is  either  allowed 
or  connived  at. 

The  exchanges  between  countries  are  at  par  only  whilst  they 
have  precisely  that  quantity  of  currency  which,  in  the  actual 
situation  of  things,  they  should  have  to  carry  on  the  circulation 
of  their  commodities.  If  the  trade  in  the  precious  metals  were 
perfectly  free,  and  money  could  be  exported  without  any  expense 
whatever,  the  exchanges  could  be  no  otherwise  in  every  country 
than  at  par.  If  the  trade  in  the  precious  metals  were  perfectly 
free — if  they  were  generally  used  in  circulation,  even  with  the 
expenses  of  transporting  them,  the  exchange  could  never  in  any 
of  them  deviate  more  from  par  than  by  these  expenses.    These 


Taxes  on  Wages  1 5 1 

principles,  I  believe,  are  now  nowhere  disputed.  If  a  country 
used  paper  money  not  exchangeable  for  specie,  and,  therefore, 
not  regulated  by  any  fixed  standard,  the  exchanges  in  that 
country  might  deviate  from  par  in  the  same  proportion  as  its 
money  might  be  multiplied  beyond  that  quantity  which  would 
have  been  allotted  to  it  by  general  commerce,  if  the  trade  in 
money  had  been  free,  and  the  precious  metals  had  been  used, 
either  for  money,  or  for  the  standard  of  money. 

If  by  the  general  operations  of  commerce,  10  millions  of  pounds 
sterling,  of  a  known  weight  and  fineness  of  bullion,  should  be  the 
portion  of  England,  and  lo  millions  of  paper  pounds  were  sub- 
stituted, no  effect  would  be  produced  on  the  exchange;  but  if 
by  the  abuse  of  the  power  of  issuing  paper  money,  11  millions 
of  pounds  should  be  employed  in  the  circulation,  the  exchange 
would  be  9  per  cent,  against  England;  if  12  millions  were 
employed,  the  exchange  would  be  16  per  cent.;  and  if  20 
millions,  the  exchange  would  be  50  per  cent,  against  England. 
To  produce  this  effect  it  is  not,  however,  necessary  that  paper 
money  should  be  employed :  any  cause  which  retains  in  circula- 
tion a  greater  quantity  of  pounds  than  would  have  circulated 
if  commerce  had  been  free,  and  the  precious  metals  of  a  known 
weight  and  fineness  had  been  used,  either  for  money  or  for  the 
standard  of  money,  would  exactly  produce  the  same  effects. 
Suppose  that  by  clipping  the  money  each  pound  did  not  contain 
tiie  quantity  of  gold  or  silver  which  by  law  it  should  contain, 
a  greater  number  of  such  pounds  might  be  employed  in  the 
circulation  than  if  they  were  not  clipped.  If  from  each  pound 
one-tenth  were  taken  away,  11  millions  of  such  pounds  might 
be  used  instead  of  10;  if  two-tenths  were  taken  away,  12 
millions  might  be  employed :  and  if  one-half  were  taken  away, 
20  millions  might  not  be  found  superfluous.  If  the  latter  sum 
were  used  instead  of  10  millions,  every  commodity  in  England, 
would  be  raised  to  double  its  former  price,  and  the  exchange 
would  be  50  per  cent,  against  England;  but  this  would  occasion 
no  disturbance  in  foreign  commerce,  nor  discourage  the  manu- 
facture of  any  one  commodity.  If,  for  example,  cloth  rose  in. 
England  from  £20  to  £40  per  piece,  we  should  just  as  freely 
export  it  after  as  before  the  rise,  for  a  compensation  of  50  per 
cent,  would  be  made  to  the  foreign  purchaser  in  the  exchange; 
so  that  with  £20  of  his  money,  he  could  purchase  a  bill  which 
would  enable  him  to  pay  a  debt  of  £40  in  England.  In  the  same 
manner,  if  he  exported  a  commodity  which  cost  £20  at  home, 
and  which  sold  in  England  for  £40,  he  would  only  receive  £20, 


152  Political  Economy 

for  £40  in  England  would  only  purchase  a  bill  for  £20  on  a 
foreign  country.  The  same  effects  would  follow  from  whatever 
cause  20  millions  could  be  forced  to  perform  the  business  of 
circulation  in  England  if  10  millions  only  were  necessary.  If 
so  absurd  a  law  as  the  prohibition  of  the  exportation  of  the 
precious  metals  could  be  enforced,  and  the  consequence  of  such 
prohibition  were  to  force  11  millions  of  good  pounds,  fresh  from 
the  mint,  instead  of  10,  into  circulation,  the  exchange  would 
be  9  per  cent,  against  England;  if  12  millions,  16  per  cent. ;  and 
if  20  millions,  50  per  cent,  against  England.  But  no  discourage- 
ment would  be  given  to  the  manufactures  of  England ;  if  home 
commodities  sold  at  a  high  price  in  England,  so  would  foreign 
commodities;  and  whether  they  were  high  or  low  would  be  of 
little  importance  to  the  foreign  exporter  and  importer,  whilst 
he  would,  on  the  one  hand,  be  obliged  to  allow  a  compensation 
in  the  exchange  when  his  commodities  sold  at  a  dear  rate,  and 
would  receive  the  same  compensation  when  he  was  obliged  to 
purchase  English  commodities  at  a  high  price.  The  sole  dis- 
advantage, then,  which  could  happen  to  a  country  from  retain- 
ing, by  prohibitory  laws,  a  greater  quantity  of  gold  and  silver 
in  circulation  than  would  otherwise  remain  there,  would  be  the 
loss  which  it  would  sustain  from  employing  a  portion  of  its 
capital  unproductively  instead  of  employing  it  productively. 
In  the  form  of  money,  this  capital  is  productive  of  no  profit: 
in  the  form  of  materials,  machinery,  and  food,  for  which  it 
might  be  exchanged,  it  would  be  productive  of  revenue,  and 
would  add  to  the  wealth  and  the  resources  of  the  state.  Thus, 
then,  I  hope.  I  have  satisfactorily  proved  that  a  comparatively 
low  price  of  the  precious  metals,  in  consequence  of  taxation, 
or  in  other  words,  a  generally  high  price  of  commodities,  would 
be  of  no  disadvantage  to  a  state,  as  a  part  of  the  metals  would 
be  exported,  which,  by  raising  their  value,  would  again  lower 
{he  prices  of  commodities.  Ajid  further,  that  if  they  were  not 
exported,  if  by  prohibitory  laws  they  could  be  retained  in  a 
country,  the  effect  on  the  exchange  would  counterbalance  the 
effect  of  high  prices.  If,  then,  taxes  on  necessaries  and  on 
wages  would  not  raise  the  prices  of  all  commodities  on  which 
labour  was  expended,  they  cannot  be  condemned  on  such 
grounds;  and  moreover,  even  if  the  opinion  given  by  Adam 
Smith,  that  they  would  have  such  an  effect,  were  well  founded, 
they  would  be  in  no  degree  injurious  on  that  account.  They 
would  be  objectionable  for  no  other  reason  than  those  which 
might  be  justly  urged  against  taxes  of  any  other  description. 


I 


Taxes  on  Wages  1 5  3 

The  landlords,  as  such,  would  be  exempted  from  the  burden 
of  the  tax;  but  as  far  as  they  directly  employed  labour  in  the 
expenditure  of  their  revenues,  by  supporting  gardeners,  menial 
servants,  etc.,  they  would  be  subject  to  its  operation. 

It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  "  taxes  upon  luxuries  have  no 
tendency  to  raise  the  price  of  any  other  commodities,  except 
that  of  the  commodities  taxed  ";  but  it  is  not  true  "  that  taxes, 
upon  necessaries,  by  raising  the  wages  of  labour,  necessarily 
tend  to  raise  the  price  of  all  manufactures."  It  is  true  that 
**  taxes  upon  luxuries  are  finally  paid  by  the  consumers  of  the 
commodities  taxed,  without  any  retribution.  They  fall  indif- 
ferently upon  every  species  of  revenue,  the  wages  of  labour,  the 
profits  of  stock,  and  the  rent  of  land  ";  but  it  is  not  true  "  that 
taxes  upon  necessaries,  so  far  as  they  affect  the  labouring  poor,  are 
finally  paid  partly  by  landlords  in  the  diminished  rent  of  their 
lands,  and  partly  by  rich  consumers,  whether  landlords  or  others, 
in  the  advanced  price  of  manufactured  goods  ";  for,  so  far  as 
these  taxes  affect  the  labouring  poor,  they  will  be  almost  wholly 
paid  by  the  diminished  profits  of  stock,  a  small  part  only  being 
paid  by  the  labourers  themselves  in  the  diminished  demand  for 
labour,  which  taxation  of  every  kind  has  a  tendency  to  produce. 

It  is  from  Dr.  Smith's  erroneous  view  of  the  effect  of  those 
taxes  that  he  has  been  led  to  the  conclusion  that  "  the  middling . 
and  superior  ranks  of  people,  if  they  understood  their  own 
interest,  ought  always  to  oppose  all  taxes  upon  the  necessaries 
of  life,  as  well  as  all  direct  taxes  upon  the  wages  of  labour." 
This  conclusion  follows  from  his  reasoning,  '*  that  the  final 
payment  of  both  one  and  the  other  falls  altogether  upon  them- 
selves, and  always  with  a  considerable  overcharge.  They  fall 
heaviest  upon  the  landlords,^  who  always  pay  in  a  double 
capacity;  in  that  of  landlords  by  the  reduction  of  their  rent, 
and  in  that  of  rich  consumers  by  the  increase  of  their  expense. 
The  observation  of  Sir  Matthew  Decker,  that  certain  taxes  are, 
in  the  price  of  certain  goods,  sometimes  repeated  and  accumu- 
lated four  or  five  times,  is  perfectly  just  with  regard  to  taxes 
upon  the  necessaries  of  life.  In  the  price  of  leather,  for  example, 
you  must  pay,  not  only  for  the  tax  upon  the  leather  of  your  own 
shoes,  but  for  a  part  of  that  upon  those  of  the  shoemaker  and 
the  tanner.  You  must  pay,  too,  for  the  tax  upon  the  salt,  upon 
the  soap,  and  upon  the  candles  which  those  workmen  consume, 
while  employed  in  your  service,  and  for  the  iax  upon  the  leather 

^  So  far  from  this  being  true,  they  would  scarcely  affect  the  landlords 
and  stockholder. 


m 

aker  I 


154  Political  Economy 

which  the  salt-maker,  the  soap-maker,  and  the  candle-maker 
consume  while  employed  in  their  service." 

Now  as  Dr.  Smith  does  not  contend  that  the  tanner,  the 
salt-maker,  the  soap-maker,  and  the  candle-maker  will  either 
of  them  be  benefited  by  the  tax  on  leather,  salt,  soap,  and 
candles;  and  as  it  is  certain  that  government  will  receive  no 
more  than  the  tax  imposed,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  that 
more  can  be  paid  by  the  public  upon  whomsoever  the  tax  may 
fall.  The  rich  consumers  may,  and  indeed  will,  pay  for  the  poor 
consumer,  but  they  will  pay  no  more  than  the  whole  amount 
of  the  tax;  and  it  is  not  in  the  nature  of  things  that  "  the  tax 
should  be  repeated  and  accumulated  four  or  five  times." 

A  system  of  taxation  may  be  defective;  more  may  be  raised 
from  the  people  than  what  finds  its  way  into  the  coffers  of 
the  state,  as  a  part,  in  consequence  of  its  effect  on  prices,  may 
possibly  be  received  by  those  who  are  benefited  by  the  peculiar 
mode  in  which  taxes  are  laid.  Such  taxes  are  pernicious,  and 
should  not  be  encouraged;  for  it  may  be  laid  down  as  a  prin- 
ciple, that  when  taxes  operate  justly,  they  conform  to  the  first 
of  Dr.  Smith's  maxims,  and  raise  from  the  people  as  little  as 
possible  beyond  what  enters  into  the  public  treasury  of  the 
state.  M.  Say  says,  "  others  offer  plans  of  finance,  and  propose 
means  for  filling  the  ooflFers  of  the  sovereign,  without  any  charge 
to  his  subjects.  But  unless  a  plan  of  finance  is  of  the  nature  of 
a  commercial  undertaking,  it  cannot  give  to  government  more 
than  it  takes  away  either  from  individuals  or  from  government 
itself,  under  some  other  form.  Something  cannot  be  made  out 
of  nothing  by  the  stroke  of  a  wand.  In  whatever  way  an  opera- 
tion may  be  disguised,  whatever  forms  we  may  constrain  a  value 
to  take,  whatever  metamorphosis  we  may  make  it  undergo,  we 
can  only  have  a  value  by  creating  it,  or  by  taking  it  from  others. 
The  very  best  of  all  plans  of  finance  is  to  spend  little,  and  the 
best  of  all  taxes  is  that  which  is  the  least  in  amount." 

Dr.  Smith  uniformly,  and  I  think  justly,  contends  that  the 
labouring  classes  cannot  materially  contribute  to  the  burdens 
of  the  state.  A  tax  on  necessaries,  or  on  wages,  will  therefore 
be  shifted  from  the  poor  to  the  rich:  if  then  the  meaning  of 
Dr.  Smith  is,  "  that  certain  taxes  are  in  the  price  of  certain  goods 
sometimes  repeated,  and  accumulated  four  or  five  times,"  for 
the  purpose  only  of  accomplishing  this  end,  namely,  the  trans- 
ference of  the  tax  from  the  poor  to  the  rich,  they  cannot  be 
liable  to  censure  on  that  account. 

Suppose  the  just  share  of  the  taxes  of  a  rich  consumer  to  be 


Taxes  on  Wages  155 

£100,  and  that  he  would  pay  it  directly  if  the  tax  were  laid  on 
income,  on  wine,  or  on  any  other  luxury,  he  would  suffer  no 
injury  if,  by  the  taxation  of  necessaries,  he  should  be  only  called 
upon  for  the  payment  of  £25,  as  far  as  his  own  consumption  of 
necessaries  and  that  of  his  family  was  concerned;  but  should 
be  required  to  repeat  this  tax  three  times,  by  paying  an  addi- 
tional price  for  other  commodities  to  remunerate  the  labourers, 
or  their  employers,  for  the  tax  which  they  have  been  called  upon 
to  advance.  Even  in  that  case  the  reasoning  is  inconclusive: 
for  if  there  be  no  more  paid  than  what  is  required  by  govern- 
ment, of  what  importance  can  it  be  to  the  rich  consumer 
whether  he  pay  the  tax  directly,  by  paying  an  increased  price 
for  an  object  of  luxury,  or  indirectly,  by  paying  an  increased 
price  for  the  necessaries  and  other  commodities  he  consumes? 
If  more  be  not  paid  by  the  people  than  what  is  received  by 
government,  the  rich  consumer  will  only  pay  his  equitable 
share;  if  more  is  paid,  Adam  Smith  should  have  stated  by 
whom  it  is  received;  but  his  whole  argument  is  founded  in 
error,  for  the  prices  of  commodities  would  not  be  raised  by  such 
taxes. 

M.  Say  does  not  appear  to  me  to  have  consistently  adhered 
to  the  obvious  principle  which  I  have  quoted  from  his  able 
work;  for  in  the  next  page,  speaking  of  taxation,  he  says, 
"  When  it  is  pushed  too  far,  it  produces  this  lamentable  effect, 
it  deprives  the  contributor  of  a  portion  of  his  riches,  without 
enriching  the  state.  This  is  what  we  may  comprehend  if  we 
consider  that  every  man's  power  of  consuming,  whether  pro- 
ductively or  not,  is  limited  by  his  income.  He  cannot  then  be 
deprived  of  a  part  of  his  income  without  being  obliged  propor- 
tionally to  reduce  his  consumption.  Hence  arises  a  diminution 
of  demand  for  those  goods  which  he  no  longer  consumes,  and 
particularly  for  those  on  which  the  tax  is  imposed.  From  this 
diminution  of  demand  there  results  a  diminution  of  production, 
and  consequently  of  taxable  commodities.  The  contributor 
then  will  lose  a  portion  of  his  enjoyments;  the  producer  a 
portion  of  his  profits;  and  the  treasury  a  portion  of  its  receipts." 

M.  Say  instances  the  tax  on  salt  in  France  previous  to  the 
revolution;  which,  he  says,  diminished  the  production  of  salt 
by  one  half.  If,  however,  less  salt  was  consumed,  less  capital 
was  employed  in  producing  it;  and,  therefore,  though  the 
producer  would  obtain  less  profit  on  the  production  of  salt,  he 
would  obtain  more  on  the  production  of  other  things.  If  a 
tax,  however  burdensome  it  may  be,  falls  on  revenue,  and  not 


156  Political  Economy 

on  capital,  it  does  not  diminish  demand,  it  only  alters  the  nature 
of  it.  It  enables  government  to  consume  as  much  of  the  pro- 
duce of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country  as  was  before 
consumed  by  the  individuals  who  contribute  to  the  tax,  an  evil 
sufficiently  great  without  overcharging  it.  If  my  income  is 
£1000  per  annum,  and  I  am  called  upon  for  £100  per  annum 
for  a  tax,  I  shall  only  be  able  to  demand  nine-tenths  of  the 
quantity  of  goods  which  I  before  consumed,  but  I  enable 
government  to  demand  the  other  tenth.  If  the  commodity 
taxed  be  com,  it  is  not  necessary  that  my  demand  for  corn 
should  diminish,  as  I  may  prefer  to  pay  £100  per  annum  more 
for  my  corn,  and  to  the  same  amount  abate  in  my  demand  for 
wine,  furniture,  or  any  other  luxury.^  Less  capital  will  con- 
sequently be  employed  in  the  wine  or  upholstery  trade,  but 
more  will  be  employed  in  manufacturing  those  commodities,  on 
which  the  taxes  levied  by  government  will  be  expended. 

M.  Say  says  that  M.  Turgot,  by  reducing  the  market  dues  on 
fish  (les  droits  d' entree  et  de  halle  sur  la  maree)  in  Paris  one  half, 
did  not  diminish  the  amount  of  their  produce,  and  that  conse- 
quently the  consumption  of  fish  must  have  doubled.  He  infers 
from  this  that  the  profits  of  the  fishermen  and  those  engaged 
in  the  trade  must  also  have  doubled,  and  that  the  income  of 
the  country  must  have  increased  by  the  whole  amount  of  these 
increased  profits;  and  by  giving  a  stimulus  to  accumulation, 
must  have  increased  the  resources  of  the  state.^ 

Without  calling  in  question  the  policy  which  dictated  this 
alteration  of  the  tax,  I  have  my  doubts  whether  it  gave  any 
great  stimulus  to  accumulation.  If  the  profits  of  the  fishermen 
and  others  engaged  in  the  trade  were  doubled  in  consequence 
of  more  fish  being  consumed,  capital  and  labour  must  have  been- 
withdrawn  from,  other  occupations  to  engage  them  in  this, 
particular  trade.     But  in  those  occupations  capital  and  labour 

*  M.  Say  says,  "  that  the  tax  added  to  the  price  of  a  commodity  raises 
its  price.  Every  increase  in  the  price  of  a  commodity  necessarily  reduces 
the  number  of  those  who  are  able  to  purchase  it,  or  at  least  the  quantity 
they  will  consume  of  it."  This  is  by  no  means  a  necessary  consequence. 
I  do  not  believe  that  if  bread  were  taxed  the  consumption  of  bread  would 
be  diminished,  more  than  if  cloth,  wine,  or  soap  were  taxed. 

*  The  following  remark  of  the  same  author  appears  to  me  equally 
erroneous:  "  When  a  high  duty  is  laid  on  cotton  the  production  of  all 
those  goods  of  which  cotton  is  the  basis  is  diminished.  If  the  total  value 
added  to  cotton  in  its  various  manufactures,  in  a  particular  country, 
amounted  to  100  millions  of  francs  per  annum,  and  the  effect  of  the  tax 
was  to  diminish  the  consumption  one  half,  then  the  tax  would  deprive 
that  country  every  year  of  50  million  of  francs,  in  addition  to  the  sura 
received  by  government." — Vol.  ii.  p.  314. 


1 


Taxes  on  Wages  157 

were  productive  of  profits,  which  must  have  been  given  up 
when  they  were  withdrawn.  The  abihty  of  the  country  to 
accumulate  was  only  increased  by  the  difference  between  the 
profits  obtained  in  the  business  in  which  the  capital  was  newly 
engaged,  and  those  obtained  in  that  from  which  it  was  with- 
drawn. 

Whether  taxes  be  taken  from  revenue  or  capital  they  diminish 
the  taxable  commodities  of  the  state.  If  I  cease  to  expend 
£100  on  wine,  because  by  paying  a  tax  of  that  amount  I  have 
enabled  government  to  expend  £ioo  instead  of  expending  it 
myself,  one  hundred  pounds'  worth  of  goods  are  necessarily 
withdrawn  from  the  list  of  taxable  commodities.  If  the  revenue 
of  the  individuals  of  a  country  be  lo  millions,  they  will  have  at 
least  10  millions'  worth  of  taxable  commodities.  If,  by  taxing 
some,  one  million  be  transferred  to  the  disposal  of  government, 
their  revenue  will  still  be  nominally  lo  millions,  but  they  will 
remain  with  only  nine  millions'  worth  of  taxable  commodities. 
There  are  no  circumstances  under  which  taxation  does  not 
abridge  the  enjoyments  of  those  on  whom  the  taxes  ultimately 
fall,  and  no  means  by  which  those  enjoyments  can  again  be 
extended  but  the  accumulation  of  new  revenue. 

Taxation  can  never  be  so  equally  applied  as  to  operate  in  the 
same  proportion  on  the  value  of  all  commodities,  and  still  to 
preserve  them  at  the  same  relative  value.  It  frequently 
operates  very  differently  from  the  intention  of  the  legislature 
by  its  indirect  effects.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  effect 
of  a  direct  tax  on  corn  and  raw  produce  Is,  if  money  be  also 
produced  in  the  country,  to  raise  the  price  of  all  commodities 
in  proportion  as  raw  produce  enters  into  their  composition,  and 
thereby  to  destroy  the  natural  relation  which  previously  existed 
between  them.  Another  indirect  effect  is  that  it  raises  wages 
and  lowers  the  rate  of  profits ;  and  we  have  also  seen,  in  another 
part  of  this  work,  that  the  effect  of  a  rise  of  wages  and  a  fall  of 
profits  is  to  lower  the  money  prices  of  those  commodities  which 
are  produced  in  a  greater  degree  by  the  employment  of  fixed 
capital. 

That  a  commodity,  when  taxed,  can  no  longer  be  so  profitably 
exported  is  so  well  understood  that  a  drawback  is  frequently 
allowed  on  its  exportation,  and  a  duty  laid  on  its  importation. 
If  these  drawbacks  and  duties  be  accurately  laid,  not  only  on 
the  commodities  themselves,  but  on  all  which  they  may  in- 
directly affect,  then,  indeed,  there  will  be  no  disturbance  in  the 
value  of  the  precious  metals.     Since  we  could  as  readily  export 


158  Political  Economy 


a  commodity  after  being  taxed  as  before,  and  since  no  peculiar 
facility  would  be  given  to  importation,  the  precious  metals 
would  not,  more  than  before,  enter  into  the  list  of  exportable 
commodities. 

Of  all  commodities  none  are  perhaps  so  proper  for  taxation 
as  those  which,  either  by  the  aid  of  nature  or  art,  are  produced 
with  peculiar  facility.  With  respect  to  foreign  countries,  such 
commodities  may  be  classed  under  the  head  of  those  which  are 
not  regulated  in  their  price  by  the  quantity  of  labour  bestowed, 
but  rather  by  the  caprice,  the  tastes,  and  the  power  of  the 
purchasers.  If  England  had  more  productive  tin  mines  than 
other  countries,  or  if,  from  superior  machinery  or  fuel,  she  had 
peculiar  facilities  in  manufacturing  cotton  goods,  the  prices  of 
tin  and  cotton  goods  would  still  in  England  be  regulated  by  the 
comparative  quantity  of  labour  and  capital  required  to  produce 
them,  and  the  competition  of  our  merchants  would  make  them 
very  little  dearer  to  the  foreign  consumer.  Our  advantage  in 
the  production  of  these  commodities  might  be  so  decided  that 
probably  they  could  bear  a  very  great  additional  price  in  the 
foreign  market  without  very  materially  diminishing  their  con- 
sumption. This  price  they  never  could  attain,  whilst  competi- 
tion was  free  at  home,  by  any  other  means  but  by  a  tax  on  their 
exportation.  This  tax  would  fall  wholly  on  foreign  consumers, 
and  part  of  the  expenses  of  the  government  of  England  woul 
be  defrayed  by  a  tax  on  the  land  and  labour  of  other  countries, 
The  tax  on  tea,  which  at  present  is  paid  by  the  people  of  England 
and  goes  to  aid  the  expenses  of  the  government  of  England 
might,  if  laid  in  China  on  the  exportation  of  the  tea,  be  diverte 
to  the  payment  of  the  expenses  of  the  government  of  China 

Taxes  on  luxuries  have  some  advantage  over  taxes  on  necei 
saries.     They  are  generally  paid  from  income,  and  therefore  d 
not  diminish  the  productive  capital  of  the  country.     If  wim 
were  much  raised  in  price  in  consequence  of  taxation,  it  i; 
probable  that  a  man  would  rather  forego  the  enjoyments  o: 
wine  than  make  any  important  encroachments  on  his  capit 
to  be  enabled  to  purchase  it.     They  are  so  identified  with  pric 
that  the  contributor  is  hardly  aware  that  he  is  paying  a  tax, 
But  they  have  also  their  disadvantages.    First,  they  neve; 
reach  capital,  and  on  some  extraordinary  occasions  it  may  be 
expedient  that  even  capital  should  contribute  towards  the  publi 
exigencies;  and,  secondly,  there  is  no  certainty  as  to  the  amount 
of  the  tax,  for  it  may  not  reach  even  income.     A  man  mtent  o: 
saving  will  exempt  himself  from  a  tax  on  wine  by  giving  up  \h 


1 


Taxes  on  Wages  159 

use  of  it.    The  income  of  the  country  may  be  undiminished, 
and  yet  the  state  may  be  unable  to  raise  a  shilling  by  the  tax. 

Whatever  habit  has  rendered  delightful  will  be  relinquished 
with  reluctance,  and  will  continue  to  be  consumed  notwith- 
standing a  very  heavy  tax;  but  this  reluctance  has  its  limits, 
and  experience  every  day  demonstrates  that  an  increase  in  the 
nominal  amount  of  taxation  often  diminishes  the  produce.  One 
man  will  continue  to  drink  the  same  quantity  of  wine,  though 
the  price  of  every  bottle  should  be  raised  three  shillings,  who 
would  yet  relinquish  the  use  of  wine  rather  than  pay  four. 
Another  will  be  content  to  pay  four,  yet  refuse  to  pay  five 
shillings.  The  same  may  be  said  of  other  taxes  on  luxuries: 
many  would  pay  a  tax  of  £5  for  the  enjoyment  which  a  horse 
affords,  who  would  not  pay  £10  or  £20.  It  is  not  because  they 
cannot  pay  more  that  they  give  up  the  use  of  wine  and  of  horses, 
but  because  they  will  not  pay  more.  Every  man  has  some 
standard  in  his  own  mind  by  which  he  estimates  the  value  of 
his  enjoyments,  but  that  standard  is  as  various  as  the  human 
character.  A  country  whose  financial  situation  has  become 
extremely  artificial,  by  the  mischievous  policy  of  accumulating 
a  large  national  debt,  and  a  consequently  enormous  taxation, 
is  particularly  exposed  to  the  inconvenience  attendant  on  this 
mode  of  raising  taxes.  After  visiting  with  a  tax  the  whole 
round  of  luxuries ;  after  laying  horses,  carriages,  wine,  servants, 
and  all  the  other  enjoyments  of  the  rich  under  contribution; 
a  minister  is  induced  to  have  recourse  to  more  direct  taxes, 
such  as  income  and  property  taxes,  neglecting  the  golden  maxim 
of  M.  Say,  "  that  the  very  best  of  all  plans  of  finance  is  to  spend 
little,  and  the  best  of  all  taxes  is  that  which  is  the  least  in 
amount." 


CHAPTER  XVII 

TAXES  ON  OTHER   COMMODITIES  THAX   RAW  PRODUCE 

On  the  same  principle  that  a  tax  on  corn  would  raise  the  price 
of  corn,  a  tax  on  any  other  commodity  would  raise  the  price  of 
that  commodity.  If  the  commodity  did  not  rise  by  a  sum  equal 
to  the  tax,  it  would  not  give  the  same  profit  to  the  producer 
which  he  had  before,  and  he  would  remove  his  capital  to  some 
Other  employment. 

The  taxing  of  all  commodities,  whether  they  be  necessaries  or 
luxuries,  will,  while  money  remains  at  an  unaltered  value,  raise 
their  prices  by  a  sum  at  least  equal  to  the  tax.^  A  tax  on  the 
manufactured  necessaries  of  the  labourer  would  have  the  same 
effect  on  wages  as  a  tax  on  com,  which  differs  from  other  neces- 
saries only  by  being  the  first  and  most  important  on  the  list; 
and  it  would  produce  precisely  the  same  effects  on  the  profits 
of  stock  and  foreign  trade.  But  a  tax  on  luxuries  would  have 
no  other  effect  than  to  raise  their  price.  It  would  fall  wholl)^j 
on  the  consumer,  and  could  neither  increase  wages  nor  loweM 
profits.  ^1 

Taxes  which  are  levied  on  a  country  for  the  purpose  of  sup- 
porting war,  or  for  the  ordinary  expenses  of  the  state,  and  which 
are  chiefly  devoted  to  the  support  of  unproductive  labourers, 
are  taken  from  the  productive  industry  of  the  country;  and 
every  saving  which  can  be  made  from  such  expenses  will  be 

*  It  is  observed  by  M.  Say,  "  that  a  manufacturer  is  not  enabled  to  make 
the  consumer  pay  the  whole  tax  levied  on  his  commodity,  because  its 
increased  price  will  diminish  its  consumption."  Should  this  be  the  case, 
should  the  consumption  be  diminished,  will  not  the  supply  also  speedily 
be  diminished?  Why  should  the  manufacturer  continue  in  the  trade  if 
his  profits  are  below  the  general  level?  M.  Say  appears  here  also  to  have 
forgotten  the  doctrine  which  he  elsewhere  supports,  "  that  the  cost  of 
production  determines  the  price,  below  which  commodities  cannot  fall  for 
any  length  of  time,  because  production  would  be  then  either  suspended 
or  diminished." — Vol.  ii.  p.  26. 

"  The  tax  in  this  case  falls  then  partly  on  the  consumer,  who  is  obliged 
to  give  more  for  the  commodity  taxed,  and  partly  on  the  producer,  who, 
after  deducting  the  tax,  will  receive  less.  The  public  treasury  will  be 
benefited  by  what  the  purchaser  pays  in  addition,  and  also  by  the  sacrifice 
which  the  producer  is  obliged  to  make  of  a  part  of  his  profits.  It  is  the 
effort  of  gunpowder,  which  acts  at  the  same  time  on  the  bullet  which  it 
projects  and  on  the  gun  which  it  causes  to  recoil." — Vol.  ii.  p.  333. 

160 


Taxes  on  Other  Commodities         i6i 

generally  added  to  the  income,  if  not  to  the  capital  of  the  con- 
tributors. When,  for  the  expenses  of  a  year's  war,  twenty 
millions  are  raised  by  means  of  a  loan,  it  is  the  twenty  millions 
which  are  withdrawn  from  the  productive  capital  of  the  nation. 
The  million  per  annum  which  is  raised  by  taxes  to  pay  the 
interest  of  this  loan  is  merely  transferred  from  those  who  pay 
it  to  those  who  receive  it,  from  the  contributor  to  the  tax  to 
the  national  creditor.  The  real  expense  is  the  twenty  millions, 
and  not  the  interest  which  must  be  paid  for  it.^  Whether  the 
interest  be  or  be  not  paid,  the  country  will  neither  be  richer  nor 
poorer.  Government  might  at  once  have  required  the  twenty 
millions  in  the  shape  of  taxes ;  in  which  case  it  would  not  have 
been  necessary  to  raise  annual  taxes  to  the  amount  of  a  million. 
This,  however,  would  not  have  changed  the  nature  of  the  trans- 
action. An  individual,  instead  of  being  called  upon  to  pay 
£ioo  per  annum,  might  have  been  obliged  to  pay  £2000  once  for 
all.  It  might  also  have  suited  his  convenience  rather  to  borrow 
this  £2000,  and  to  pay  £100  per  annum  for  interest  to  the  lender, 
than  to  spare  the  larger  sum  from  his  own  funds.  In  one  case, 
it  is  a  private  transaction  between  A  and  B,  in  the  other  govern- 
ment guarantees  to  B  the  payment  of  interest  to  be  equally 
paid  by  A.  If  the  transaction  had  been  of  a  private  nature,  no 
public  record  would  be  kept  of  it,  and  it  would  be  a  matter  of 
comparative  indifference  to  tlie  country  whether  A  faithfully 
performed  his  contract  to  B  or  unjustly  retained  the  £100  per 
annum  in  his  own  possession.  The  country  would  have  a 
general  interest  in  the  faithful  performance  of  a  contract,  but 
with  respect  to  the  national  wealth  it  would  have  no  other 
interest  than  whether  A  or  B  would  make  this  £100  most  pro- 
ductive;   but  on  this  question  it  would  neither  have  the  right 

^  "  Melon  says  that  the  debts  of  a  nation  are  debts  due  from  the  right  hand 
to  the  left,  by  which  the  body  is  not  weakened.  It  is  true  that  the  general 
wealth  is  not  diminished  by  the  payment  of  the  interest  on  arrears  of  the 
debt:  The  dividends  are  a  value  which  passes  from  the  hand  of  the  con- 
tributor to  the  national  creditor:  Whether  it  be  the  national  creditor  or 
the  contributor  who  accumulates  or  consumes  it  is,  I  agree,  of  little 
importance  to  the  society;  but  the  principal  of  the  debt — what  has  become 
of  that?  It  exists  no  more.  The  consumption  which  has  followed  the 
loan  has  annihilated  a  capital  which  will  never  yield  any  further  revenue. 
The  society  is  deprived  not  of  the  amovmt  of  interest,  since  that 
passes  from  one  hand  to  the  other,  but  of  the  revenue  from  a  destroyed 
capital.  This  capital,  if  it  had  been  employed  productively  by  him  who 
lent  it  to  the  state,  would  equally  have  yielded  him  an  income,  but  that 
income  would  have  been  derived  from  a  real  production,  and  would  not 
have  been  furnished  from  the  pocket  of  a  fellow  citizen." — Say,  vol.  ii. 
p.  357.  This  is  both  conceived  and  expressed  in  the  true  spirit  of  the 
science. 


1 62  Political  Economy 

nor  the  ability  to  decide.  It  might  be  possible  that,  if  A 
retained  it  for  his  own  use,  he  might  squander  it  unprofitably, 
and  if  it  were  paid  to  B  he  might  add  it  to  his  capital  and 
employ  it  productively.  And  the  converse  would  also  be  pos- 
sible ;  B  might  squander  it,  and  A  might  employ  it  productively. 
With  a  view  to  wealth  only,  it  might  be  equally  or  more  desir- 
able that  A  should  or  should  not  pay  it;  but  the  claims  of  justice 
and  good  faith,  a  greater  utility,  are  not  to  be  compelled  to 
yield  to  those  of  a  less ;  and  accordingly,  if  the  state  were  called 
upon  to  interfere,  the  courts  of  justice  would  oblige  A  to  perform 
his  contract.  A  debt  guaranteed  by  the  nation  differs  in  no 
respect  from  the  above  transaction.  Justice  and  good  faith 
demand  that  the  interest  of  the  national  debt  should  continue 
to  be  paid,  and  that  those  who  have  advanced  their  capitals 
for  the  general  benefit  should  not  be  required  to  forego  their 
equitable  claims  on  the  plea  of  expediency. 

But  independently  of  this  consideration,  it  is  by  no  means 
certain  that  political  utility  would  gain  anything  by  the  sacrifice 
of  political  integrity;  it  does  by  no  means  follow  that  the  party 
exonerated  from  the  payment  of  the  interest  of  the  national  detjHI 
would  employ  it  more  productively  than  those  to  whom  indisMI 
putably  it  is  due.  By  cancelling  the  national  debt,  one  man's 
income  might  be  raised  from  £1000  to  £1500,  but  another  man 
would  be  lowered  from  £1500  to  £1000.  These  two  men' 
incomes  now  amount  to  £2500 ;  they  would  amount  to  no  moi 
then.  If  it  be  the  object  of  government  to  raise  taxes,  the 
would  be  precisely  the  same  taxable  capital  and  income  in  o: 
case  as  in  the  other.  It  is  not,  then,  by  the  payment  of  t 
interest  on  the  national  debt  that  a  country  is  distressed,  n 
is  it  by  the  exoneration  from  payment  that  it  can  be  relieve 
It  is  only  by  saving  from  income,  and  retrenching  in  expenditur 
that  the  national  capital  can  be  increased;  and  neither  t] 
income  would  be  increased  nor  the  expenditure  diminished  b; 
the  annihilation  of  the  national  debt.  It  is  by  the  profu 
expenditure  of  government  and  of  individuals,  and  by  loa 
that  the  country  is  impoverished;  every  measure,  therefore 
which  is  calculated  to  promote  public  and  private  economy  will 
relieve  the  public  distress ;  but  it  is  error  and  delusion  to  suppose 
that  a  real  national  difficulty  can  be  removed  by  shifting  it  from 
the  shoulders  of  one  class  of  the  community,  who  justly  ought 
to  bear  it,  to  the  shoulders  of  another  class,  who,  upon  every 
principle  of  equity,  ought  to  bear  no  more  than  their  share. 

From  what  I  have  said,  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  I  consider 


Taxes  on  Other  Commodities         163 

the  system  of  borrowing  as  the  best  calculated  to  defray  the 
extraordinary  expenses  of  the  state.  It  is  a  system  which  tends 
to  make  us  less  thrifty — to  blind  us  to  our  real  situation.  If  the 
expenses  of  a  war  be  40  millions  per  annum,  and  the  share  which 
a  man  would  have  to  contribute  towards  that  annual  expense 
were  £100,  he  would  endeavour,  on  being  at  once  called  upon 
for  his  portion,  to  save  speedily  the  £100  from  his  income.  By 
the  system  of  loans,  he  is  called  upon  to  pay  only  the  interest 
of  this  £100,  or  £5  per  annum,  and  considers  that  he  does 
enough  by  saving  this  £5  from  his  expenditure,  and  then  deludes 
himself  with  the  belief  that  he  is  as  rich  as  before.  The  whole 
nation,  by  reasoning  and  acting  in  this  manner,  save  only  the 
interest  of  40  millions,  or  two  millions;  and  thus  not  only  lose 
all  the  interest  or  profit  which  40  millions  of  capital,  employed 
productively,  would  afford,  but  also  38  millions,  the  difference 
between  their  savings  and  expenditure.  If,  as  I  before  observed, 
each  man  had  to  make  his  own  loan,  and  contribute  his  full 
proportion  to  the  exigencies  of  the  state,  as  soon  as  the  war 
ceased  taxation  would  cease,  and  we  should  immediately  fall 
into  a  natural  state  of  prices.  Out  of  his  private  funds,  A 
might  have  to  pay  to  B  interest  for  the  money  he  borrowed  of 
him  during  the  war  to  enable  him  to  pay  his  quota  of  the 
expense;  but  with  this  the  nation  would  have  no  concern. 

A  country  which  has  accumulated  a  large  debt  is  placed  in 
a  most  artificial  situation;  and  although  the  amount  of  taxes, 
and  the  increased  price  of  labour,  may  not,  and  I  believe  does 
not,  place  it  under  any  other  disadvantage  with  respect  to 
foreign  countries,  except  the  unavoidable  one  of  paying  those 
taxes,  yet  it  becomes  the  interest  of  every  contributor  to  with- 
draw his  shoulder  from  the  burthen,  and  to  shift  this  payment 
from  himself  to  another;  and  the  temptation  to  remove  himself 
and  his  capital  to  another  country,  where  he  will  be  exempted 
from  such  burthens,  becomes  at  last  irresistible,  and  overcomes 
the  natural  reluctance  which  every  m.an  feels  to  quit  the  place 
of  his  birth  and  the  scene  of  his  early  association§.  A  country 
which  has  involved  itself  in  the  difficulties  attending  this 
artificial  system  would  act  wisely  by  ransoming  itself  from 
them  at  the  sacrifice  of  any  portion  of  its  property  which 
might  be  necessary  to  redeem  its  debt.  That  which  is  wise  in 
an  individual  is  wise  also  in  a  nation.  A  man  who  has  £10,000,. 
paying  him  an  income  of  £500,  out  of  which  he  has  to  pay  £100 
per  annum  towards  the  interest  of  the  debt,  is  really  worth  only 
£8000,  and  would  be  equally  rich,  whether  he  continued  to  pay 


I 


164  Political  Economy 

£100  per  annum,  or  at  once,  and  for  only  once,  sacrificed  £2000. 
But  where,  it  is  asked,  would  be  the  purchaser  of  the  property 
which  he  must  sell  to  obtain  this  £2000  ?  The  answer  is  plain : 
the  national  creditor,  who  is  to  receive  this  £2000,  will  want 
an  investment  for  his  money,  and  will  be  disposed  either  to  lend 
it  to  the  landholder,  or  manufacturer,  or  to  purchase  from  them 
a  part  of  the  property  of  which  they  have  to  dispose.  To  such 
a  pa^Tnent  the  stockholders  themselves  would  largely  contribute. 
This  scheme  has  been  often  recommended,  but  we  have,  I  fear, 
neither  wisdom  enough,  nor  virtue  enough,  to  adopt  it.  It 
must,  however,  be  admitted,  that  during  peace,  our  unceasing 
efforts  should  be  directed  towards  paying  off  that  part  of  the 
debt  which  has  been  contracted  during  war;  and  that  no  temp- 
tation of  relief,  no  desire  of  escape  from  present,  and  I  hope 
temporary,  distresses  should  induce  us  to  relax  in  our  attention 
to  that  great  object. 

No  sinking  fund  can  be  efficient  for  the  purpose  of  diminishing 
the  debt  if   it  be  not  derived  from  the  excess  of   the  public 
revenue  over  the  public  expenditure.     It  is  to  be  regretted  that 
the  sinking  fund  in  this  country  is  only  such  in  name;  for  there 
is   no   excess   of   revenue   above   expenditure.     It   ought,   by 
economy,  to  be  made  what  it  is  professed  to  be,  a  really  efficient 
fund  for  the  payment  of  the  debt.     If,  on  the  breaking  out  of 
any  future  war,  we  shall  not  have  very  considerably  reduced 
our  debt,  one  of  two  things  must  happen,  either  the  whole 
expenses  of  that  war  must  be  defrayed  by  taxes  raised  from 
year  to  year,  or  we  must,  at  the  end  of  that  war,  if  not  befon 
submit  to  a  national  bankruptcy ;   not  that  we  shall  be  unabl 
to  bear  any  large  additions  to  the  debt;    it  would  be  difficul 
to  set  limits  to  the  powers  of  a  great  nation;    but  assuredljj 
there  are  limits  to  the  price,  which  in  the  form  of  perpetui 
taxation,  individuals  will  submit  to  pay  for  the  privilege  merelj 
of  living  in  their  native  country.^ 

When  a  commodity  is  at  a  monopoly  price  it  is  at  the  vei 

highest  price  at  which  the  consumers  are  willing  to  purchase 

'  "  Credit,  in  general,  is  good,  as  it  allows  capitals  to  leave  those  han< 
where  they  are  not  usefully  employed,  to  pass  into  those  where  they  wi 
be  made  productive :  it  diverts  a  capital  from  an  employment  useful  on! 
to  the  capitalist,  such  as  an  investment  in  the  public  funds,  to  make 
productive  in  the  hands  of  industry.  It  facilitates  the  employments 
all  capitals,  and  leaves  none  unemployed." — Economie  Politique,  p.  463 
vol.  ii.  4th  edition. — This  must  be  an  oversight  of  M.  Say.  The  capitj 
•of  the  stockholder  can  never  be  made  productive — it  is,  in  fact,  no  capita 
If  he  were  to  sell  his  stock,  and  employ  the  capital  he  obtained  for  i 
productively,  he  could  only  do  so  by  detaching  the  capital  of  the  buy^ 
of  his  stock  from  a  productive  employment. 


Taxes  on  Other  Commodities         165 

Commodities  are  only  at  a  monopoly  price  when  by  no  possible 
device  their  quantity  can  be  augmented;  and  when,  therefore^ 
the  competition  is  wholly  on  one  side  —  amongst  the  buyers. 
The  monopoly  price  of  one  period  may  be  much  lower  or  higher 
than  the  monopoly  price  of  another,  because  the  competition 
amongst  the  purchasers  must  depend  on  their  wealth,  and  their 
tastes  and  caprices.  Those  peculiar  wines  which  are  produced 
in  very  limited  quantity,  and  those  works  of  art  which,  from 
their  excellence  or  rarity,  have  acquired  a  fanciful  value,  will 
be  exchanged  for  a  very  different  quantity  of  the  produce  of 
ordinary  labour,  according  as  the  society  is  rich  or  poor,  as  it 
possesses  an  abundance  or  scarcity  of  such  produce,  or  as  it  may 
l)e  in  a  rude  or  polished  state.  The  exchangeable  value  there- 
fore of  a  commodity  which  is  at  a  monopoly  price  is  nowhere 
regulated  by  the  cost  of  production. 

Raw  produce  is  not  at  a  monopoly  price,  because  the  market 
price  of  barley  and  wheat  is  as  much  regulated  by  their  cost  of 
production  as  the  market  price  of  cloth  and  linen.  The  only 
difference  is  this,  that  one  portion  of  the  capital  employed  in 
agriculture  regulates  the  price  of  com,  namely,  that  portion 
which  pays  no  rent;  whereas,  in  the  production  of  manufactured 
commodities,  every  portion  of  capital  is  employed  with  the  same 
results;  and  as  no  portion  pays  rent,  every  portion  is  equally 
a  regulator  of  price :  corn,  and  other  raw  produce,  can  be  aug- 
mented, too,  in  quantity,  by  the  employment  of  more  capital 
on  the  land,  and  therefore  they  are  not  at  a  monopoly  price. 
There  is  competitiorf  among  the  sellers,  as  well  as  amongst  the 
buyers.  This  is  not  the  case  in  the  production  of  those  rare 
wines,  and  those  valuable  specimens  of  art,  of  which  we  have 
been  speaking;  their  quantity  cannot  be  increased,  and  their 
price  is  limited  only  by  the  extent  of  the  power  and  will  of  the 
purchasers.  The  rent  of  these  vineyards  may  be  raised  beyond 
any  moderately  assignable  limits,  because  no  other  land  being 
able  to  produce  such  wines,  none  can  be  brought  into  competition 
with  them. 

The  com  and  raw  produce  of  a  country  may,  indeed,  for  a  time, 
sell  at  a  monopoly  price;  but  they  can  do  so  permanently  only 
when  no  more  capital  can  be  profitably  employed  on  the  lands, 
and  when,  therefore,  their  produce  cannot  be  increased.  At 
such  time,  every  portion  of  land  in  cultivation,  and  every  portion 
of  capital  employed  on  the  land,  will  yield  a  rent,  differing, 
indeed,  in  proportion  to  the  difference  in  the  retum.  At  such 
a  time,  too,  any  tax  which  may  be  imposed  on  the  farmer  will 


i66  Political  Economy 

fall  on  rent,  and  not  on  the  consumer.  He  cannot  raise  the 
price  of  his  corn,  because,  by  the  supposition,  it  is  already  at  the 
highest  price  at  which  the  purchasers  will  or  can  buy  it.  He 
will  not  be  satisfied  with  a  lower  rate  of  profits  than  that  obtained 
by  other  capitalists,  and,  therefore,  his  only  alternative  will  be 
to  obtain  a  reduction  of  rent  or  to  quit  his  employment. 

Mr.  Buchanan  considers  com  and  raw  produce  as  at  a 
monopoly  price,  because  they  yield  a  rent:  all  commodities 
which  yield  a  rent,  he  supposes,  must  be  at  a  monopoly  price; 
and  thence  he  infers  that  all  taxes  on  raw  produce  would  fall 
on  the  landlord,  and  not  on  the  consumer.  "  The  price  of  com," 
he  says,  "  which  always  affords  a  rent,  being  in  no  respect 
influenced  by  the  expenses  of  its  production,  those  expenses 
must  be  paid  out  of  the  rent;  and  when  they  rise  or  fall,  there- 
fore, the  consequence  is  not  a  higher  or  lower  price,  but  a  higher 
or  a  lower  rent.  In  this  view,  all  taxes  on  farm  servants,  horses, 
or  the  implements  of  agriculture  are  in  reality  land-taxes — 
the  burden  falling  on  the  farmer  during  the  currency  of  his 
lease,  and  on  the  landlord  when  the  lease  comes  to  be  renewed. 
In  like  manner,  all  those  improved  implements  of  husbandr}' 
which  save  expense  to  the  farmer,  such  as  machines  for  thrashing 
and  reaping,  whatever  gives  him  easier  access  to  the  market, 
such  as  good  roads,  canals,  and  bridges,  though  they  lessen  the 
original  cost  of  com,  do  not  lessen  its  market  price.  Whatever 
is  saved  by  those  improvements,  therefore,  belongs  to  the  land- 
lord as  part  of  his  rent. 

It  is  evident  that  if  we  yield  to  Mr.  Buchanan  the  basis  on 
which  his  argument  is  built,  namely,  that  the  price  of  com 
always  yields  a  rent,  all  the  consequences  which  he  contends 
for  would  follow  of  course.  Taxes  on  the  farmer  would  then 
fall,  not  on  the  consumer,  but  on  rent;  and  all  improvements 
m  husbandry  would  increase  rent:  but  I  hope  I  have  made  it 
sufficiently  clear  that,  until  a  country  is  cultivated  in  every 
part,  and  up  to  the  highest  degree,  there  is  always  a  portion  o; 
capital  employed  on  the  land  which  yields  no  rent,  and  that  it  is 
this  portion  of  capital,  the  result  of  which,  as  in  manufactures,  is 
divided  between  profits  and  wages,  that  regulates  the  price  of 
com.  The  price  of  corn,  then,  which  does  not  afford  a  rent,j 
being  influenced  by  the  expenses  of  its  production,  those  expenses 
cannot  be  paid  out  of  rent.  The  consequence,  therefore,  of  thos 
expenses  increasing,  is  a  higher  price,  and  not  a  lower  rent.' 

'  "  Manufacturing  industry  increases  its  produce  in  proportion  to  th< 
demand,  and  the  price  falls;   btit  the  produce  of  land  cannot  be  so  increased  A 


• 


Taxes  on  Other  Commodities         167 

It  is  remarkable  that  both  Adam  Smith  and  Mr.  Buchanan, 
who  entirely  agree  that  taxes  on  raw  produce,  a  land-tax,  and 
tithes,  all  fall  on  the  rent  of  land,  and  not  on  the  consumers  of 
raw  produce,  should  nevertheless  admit  that  taxes  on  malt 
would  fall  on  the  consumer  of  beer,  and  not  on  the  rent  of  the 
landlord.  Adam  Smith's  argument  is  so  able  a  statement  of 
the  view  which  I  take  of  the  subject  of  the  tax  on  malt,  and 
every  other  tax  on  raw  produce,  that  I  cannot  refrain  from 
offering  it  to  the  attention  of  the  reader. 

"  The  rent  and  profits  of  barley  land  must  always  be  nearly 
equal  to  those  of  other  equally  fertile  and  equally  well  cultivated 
land.  If  they  were  less,  some  part  of  the  barley  land  would 
soon  be  turned  to  some  other  purpose;  and  if  they  were  greater, 
more  land  would  soon  be  turned  to  the  raising  of  barley.  When 
the  ordinary  price  of  any  particular  produce  of  land  is  at  what 
may  be  called  a  monopoly  price,  a  tax  upon  it  necessarily  reduces 
the  rent  and  profit  ^  of  the  land  which  grows  it.  A  tax  upon 
the  produce  of  those  precious  vineyards,  of  which  the  wine  falls 
so  much  short  of  the  effectual  demand  that  its  price  is  always 
above  the  natural  proportion  to  that  of  other  equally  fertile  and 
equally  well  cultivated  land,  would  necessarily  reduce  the  rent 
and  profit  ^  of  those  vineyards.  The  price  of  the  wines  being 
already  the  highest  that  could  be  got  for  the  quantity  commonly 
sent  to  market,  it  could  not  be  raised  higher  without  diminishing 
that  quantity;  and  the  quantity  could  not  be  diminished  with- 
out still  greater  loss,  because  the  lands  could  not  be  turned  to 
any  other  equally  valuable  produce.  The  whole  weight  of  the 
tax,  therefore,  would  fall  upon  the  rent  and  profit;  ^  properly 
upon  the  rent  of  the  vineyard." — "  But  the  ordinary  price  of 
barley  has  never  been  a  monopoly  price ;  and  the  rent  and  profits 
of  barley  land  have  never  been  above  their  natural  proportion 
to  those  of  other  equally  fertile  and  equally  well  cultivated  land. 
The  different  taxes  which  have  been  imposed  upon  malt,  beer, 
and  ale  have  never  lowered  Oie  price  of  barley ;  have  never 
reduced  the  rent  and  profit  ^  of  barley  land.    The  price  of  malt 

and  a  high  price  is  still  necessary  to  prevent  the  consumption  from  exceed- 
ing the  supply." — Buchanan,  vol.  iv.  p.  40.  Is  it  possible  that  Mr. 
Buchanan  can  seriously  assert  that  the  produce  of  the  land  cannot  be 
increased  if  the  demand  increases? 

*  I  wish  the  word  "  profit  "  had  been  omitted.  Dr.  Smith  must  suppose 
the  profits  of  the  tenants  of  these  precious  vineyards  to  be  above  the 
general  rate  of  profits.  If  they  were  not,  they  would  not  pay  the  tax, 
unless  they  could  shift  it  either  to  the  landlord  qx  consumer. 


I 


1 68  Political  Economy 

to  the  brewer  has  constantly  risen  in  proportion  to  the  taxes 
imposed  upon  it;  and  those  taxes,  together  with  the  different 
duties  upon  beer  and  ale,  have  constantly  either  raised  the  price, 
or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,  reduced  the  quality  of  those 
commodities  to  the  consumer.  The  final  pavment'  of  those 
taxes  has  fallen  constantly  upon  the  consumer  and  not  upon  the 
producer."  On  this  passage  Mr.  Buchanan  remarks,  "  A  duty 
on  malt  never  could  reduce  the  price  of  barley,  because,  unless 
as  much  could  be  made  of  barley  by  malting  it  as  by  selling  it 
unmalted,  the  quantity  required  would  not  be  brought  to 
market.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  price  of  malt  must  rise 
in  proportion  to  the  tax  imposed  on  it,  as  the  demand  could  not 
otherwise  be  supplied.  The  price  of  barley,  however,  is  just  as 
much  a  monopoly  price  as  that  of  sugar;  they  both  yield  a  rent, 
and  the  market  price  of  both  has  equally  lost  all  connection 
with  the  original  cost." 

It  appears,  then,  to  be  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Buchanan,  that 
a  tax  on  malt  would  raise  the  price  of  malt,  but  that  a  tax  on 
the  barley  from  which  malt  is  made  would  not  raise  the  price 
of  barley;  and,  therefore,  if  malt  is  taxed,  the  tax  will  be  paid 
by  the  consumer;  if  barley  is  taxed,  it  will  be  paid  by  the  land-  v 
lord,  as  he  will  receive  a  diminished  rent.  According  to  Mr.n 
Buchanan,  then,  barley  is  at  a  monopoly  price  at  the  highest™ 
price  which  the  purchasers  are  willing  to  give  for  it;  but  malt 
made  of  barley  is  not  at  a  monopoly  price,  and  consequently 
it  can  be  raised  in  proportion  to  the  taxes  that  may  be  imposed 
upon  it.  This  opinion  of  Mr.  Buchanan  of  the  effects  of  a  tax 
on  malt  appears  to  me  to  be  in  direct  contradiction  to  the 
opinion  he  has  given  of  a  similar  tax,  a  tax  on  bread.  "  A  tax 
on  bread  will  be  ultimately  paid,  not  by  a  rise  of  price,  but  by 
a  reduction  of  rent."  ^  If  a  tax  on  malt  would  raise  the  price  o: 
beer,  a  tax  on  bread  must  raise  the  price  of  bread. 

The  following  argument  of  M.  Say  is  founded  on  the  sam^ 
views  as  Mr.  Buchanan's:   "  The  quantity  of  wine  or  corn  which! 
a  piece  of  land  will  produce  will  remain  nearly  the  same,  what- 
ever may  be  the  tax  with  which  it  is  charged.     The  tax  may, 
take  away  a  half,  or  even  three-fourths  of  its  net  produce,  or  o: 
its  rent,  if  you  please,  yet  the  land  would  nevertheless  be  culti-- 
vated  for  the  half  or  the  quarter  not  absorbed  by  the  tax.    The 
rent,  that  is  to  say,  the  landlord's  share,  would  merely  be 
somewhat  lower.     The  reason  of  this  will  be  perceived  if  we; 
consider  that,  in  the  case  supposed,  the  quantity  of  produc 
^  Vol.  iii.  p.  355. 


Taxes  on  Other  Commodities         169 

obtained  from  the  land  and  sent  to  market  will  remain  never- 
theless the  same.  On  the  other  hand,  the  motives  on  which 
the  demand  for  the  produce  is  founded  continue  also  the 
same. 

"  Now,  if  the  quantity  of  produce  supplied,  and  the  quantit}^ 
demanded,  necessarily  continue  the  same,  notwithstanding  the 
establishment  or  the  increase  of  the  tax,  the  price  of  that  produce 
will  not  vary;  and  if  the  price  do  not  vary,  the  consumer  will 
not  pay  the  smallest  portion  of  this  tax. 

"  Will  it  be  said  that  the  farmer,  he  who  furnishes  labour  and 
capital,  will,  jointly  with  the  landlord,  bear  the  burden  of  this 
tax  ? — certainly  not ;  because  the  circumstance  of  the  tax  has  not 
diminished  the  number  of  farms  to  be  let,  nor  increased  the 
number  of  farmers.  Since,  in  this  instance  also,  the  supply  and 
demand  remain  the  same,  the  rent  of  farms  must  also  remain 
the  same.  The  example  of  the  manufacturer  of  salt,  who  can 
only  make  the  consumers  pay  a  portion  of  the  tax,  and  that 
of  the  landlord,  who  cannot  reimburse  himself  in  the  smallest 
degree,  prove  the  error  of  those  who  maintain,  in  opposition  to 
the  economists,  that  all  taxes  fall  ultimately  on  the  consumer." 
—Vol.  ii.  p.  338. 

If  the  tax  *'  took  away  half,  or  even  three-fourths  of  the  net 
produce  of  the  land,"  and  the  price  of  produce  did  not  rise,  how 
could  those  farmers  obtain  the  usual  profits  of  stock  who  paid 
very  moderate  rents,  having  that  quality  of  land  which  required 
a  much  larger  proportion  of  labour  to  obtain  a  given  result  than 
land  of  a  more  fertile  quality?  If  the  whole  rent  were  remitted^ 
they  would  still  obtain  lower  profits  than  those  in  other  trades, 
and  would  therefore  not  continue  to  cultivate  their  land,  unless 
they  could  raise  the  price  of  its  produce.  If  the  tax  fell  on  tJie 
farmers,  there  would  be  fewer  farmers  disposed  to  hire  farms; 
if  it  fell  on  the  landlord,  many  farms  would  not  be  let  at  all,  for 
they  would  afford  no  rent.  But  from  what  fund  would  those 
pay  the  tax  who  produce  com  without  paying  any  rent  ?  It  is 
quite  clear  that  the  tax  must  fall  on  the  consumer.  How  would 
such  land  as  M.  Say  describes  in  the  following  passage  pay  a  tax 
of  one-half  or  three-fourths  of  its  produce  ? 

"  We  see  in  Scotland  poor  lands  thus  cultivated  by  the  pro- 
prietor, and  which  could  be  cultivated  by  no  other  person. 
Thus,  too,  we  see  in  the  interior  provinces  of  the  United  States 
vast  and  fertile  lands,  the  revenue  of  which,  alone,  would  not  be 
sufficient  for  the  maintenance  of  the  proprietor.    These  lands 


170  Political  Economy 

are  cultivated  nevertheless,  but  it  must  be  by  the  proprietor 
himself,  or,  in  other  words,  he  must  add  to  the  rent,  which  is 
little  or  nothing,  the  profits  of  his  capital  and  industry,  to  enable 
him  to  live  in  competence.  It  is  well  known  that  land,  though 
cultivated,  yields  no  revenue  to  the  landlord  when  no  farmer 
will  be  willing  to  pay  a  rent  for  it:  which  is  a  proof  that  such 
land  will  give  only  the  profits  of  the  capital,  and  of  the  industry 
necessary  for  its  cultivation." — Say,  vol.  ii.  p.  127. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 

POOR   RATES 

We  have  seen  that  taxes  on  raw  produce,  and  on  the  profits  of 
the  farmer,  will  fall  on  the  consumer  of  raw  produce;  since, 
unless  he  had  the  power  of  remunerating  himself  by  an  increase 
of  price,  the  tax  would  reduce  his  profits  below  the  general  level 
of  profits,  and  would  urge  him  to  remove  his  capital  to  some 
other  trade.  We  have  seen,  too,  that  he  could  not,  by  deducting 
it  from  his  rent,  transfer  the  tax  to  his  landlord;  because  that 
farmer  who  paid  no  rent  would,  equally  with  the  cultivator  of 
better  land,  be  subject  to  the  tax,  whether  it  were  laid  on  raw 
produce  or  on  the  profits  of  the  farmer.  I  have  also  attempted 
to  show  that  if  a  tax  were  general,  and  affected  equally  all 
profits,  whether  manufacturing  or  agricultural,  it  would  not 
operate  either  on  the  price  of  goods  or  raw  produce,  but  would 
be  immediately,  as  well  as  ultimately,  paid  by  the  producers. 
A  tax  on  rent,  it  has  been  observed,  would  fall  on  the  landlord 
only,  and  could  not  by  any  means  be  made  to  devolve  on  the 
tenant. 

The  poor  rate  is  a  tax  which  partakes  of  the  nature  of  all 
these  taxes,  and,  under  different  circumstances,  falls  on  the 
consumer  of  raw  produce  and  goods,  on  the  profits  of  stock, 
and  on  the  rent  of  land.  It  is  a  tax  which  falls  with  peculiar 
weight  on  the  profits  of  the  farmer,  and  therefore  may  be  con- 
sidered as  affecting  the  price  of  raw  produce.  According  to  the 
degree  in  which  it  bears  on  manufacturing  and  agricultural 
profits  equally,  it  will  be  a  general  tax  on  the  profits  of  stock, 
and  will  occasion  no  alteration  in  the  price  of  raw  produce  and 
manufactures.  In  proportion  to  the  farmer's  inability  to 
remunerate  himself,  by  raising  the  price  of  raw  produce  for 
that  portion  of  the  tax  which  peculiarly  affects  him,  it  will  be 
a  tax  on  rent  and  will  be  paid  by  the  landlord.  To  know,  then, 
the  operation  of  the  poor  rate  at  any  particular  time,  we  must 
ascertain  whether  at  that  time  it  affects  in  an  equal  or  an  unequal 
degree  the  profits  of  the  farmer  and  manufacturer;  and  also 
whether  the  circumstances  be  such  as  to  afford  to  the  farmer 
the  power  of  raising  the  price  of  raw  produce. 

The  poor  rates  are  professed  to  be  levied  on  the  farmer  in 

171 


172  Political  Economy 

proportion  to  his  rent;  and,  accordingly,  the  farmer  who  pai 
a  very  small  rent,  or  no  rent  at  all,  should  pay  little  or  no  tax. 
If  this  were  true,  poor  rates,  as  far  as  they  are  paid  by  the 
agricultural  class,  would  entirely  fall  on  the  landlord,  and  could 
not  be  shifted  to  the  consumer  of  raw  produce.  But  I  believe 
that  it  is  not  true;  the  poor  rate  is  not  levied  according  to  the 
rent  which  a  farmer  actually  pays  to  his  landlord ;  it  is  propor- 
tioned to  the  annual  value  of  his  land,  whether  that  annual 
value  be  given  to  it  by  the  capital  of  the  landlord  or  of  the 
tenant. 

If  two  farmers  rented  land  of  two  different  qualities  in  the 
same  parish,  the  one  paying  a  rent  of  £100  per  annum  for 
50  acres  of  the  most  fertile  land,  and  the  other  the  same  sum 
of  £100  for  1000  acres  of  the  least  fertile  land,  they  would  pay 
the  same  amount  of  poor  rates,  if  neither  of  them  attempted 
to  improve  the  land;   but  if  the  farmer  of  the  poor  land,  pre- 
suming on  a  very  long  lease,  should  be  induced,  at  a  great 
expense,  to  improve  the  productive  powers  of  his  land,  by 
manuring,  draining,  fencing,  etc.,  he  would  contribute  to  the 
poor  rates,  not  in  proportion  to  the  actual  rent  paid  to  the 
landlord,  but  to  the  actual  annual  value  of  the  land.     The  rate 
might  equal  or  exceed  the  rent;   but  whether  it  did  or  not,  m 
part  of  this  rate  would  be  paid  by  the  landlord.     It  would  havi 
been  previously  calculated  upon  by  the  tenant;  and  if  the  pri 
of  produce  were  not  sufficient  to  compensate  him  for  all  hi 
expenses,  together  with  this  additional  charge  for  poor  rate 
his   improvements  would  not  have  been  undertaken.     It 
evident,  then,  that  the  tax  in  this  case  is  paid  by  the  consumer, 
for  if  there  had  been  no  rate,  the  same  improvements  woul 
have  been  undertaken,  and  the  usual  and  general  rate  of  profi 
would  have  been  obtained  on  the  stock  employed  with  a  low 
price  of  com. 

Nor  would  it  make  the  slightest  difference  in  this  question 
the  landlord  had  made  these  improvements  himself,  and  had 
consequence  raised  his  rent  from  £100  to  £500;  the  rate  woul 
be  equally  charged  to  the  consumer;  for  whether  the  landlor 
should  expend  a  large  sum  of  money  on  his  land  would  depen 
on  the  rent,  or  what  is  called  rent,  which  he  would  receive 
a  remuneration  for  it;  and  this  again  would  depend  on  the  pri 
of  corn,  or  other  raw  produce,  being  sufficiently  high,  not  onl 
to  cover  this  additional  rent,  but  also  the  rate  to  which  the  Ian 
would  be  subject.  If  at  the  same  time  all  manufacturing  capi 
contributed  to  the  poor  rates  in  the  same  proportion  as 


I 


Poor  Rates  173 

capital  expended  by  the  farmer  or  landlord  in  improving  the 
land,  then  it  would  no  longer  be  a  partial  tax  on  the  profits  of 
the  farmer's  or  landlord's  capital,  but  a  tax  on  the  capital  of 
all  producers;  and,  therefore,  it  could  no  longer  be  shifted 
either  on  the  consumer  of  raw  produce  or  on  the  landlord.  The 
farmer's  profits  would  feel  the  effect  of  the  rate  no  more  than 
those  of  the  manufacturer;  and  the  former  could  not,  any  more 
than  the  latter,  plead  it  as  a  reason  for  an  advance  in  the  price 
of  his  commodity.  It  is  not  the  absolute  but  the  relative  fall 
of  profits  which  prevents  capital  from  being  employed  in  any 
particular  trade:  it  is  the  difference  of  profit  which  sends 
capital  from  one  employment  to  another. 

It  must  be  acknowledged,  however,  that  in  the  actual  state 
of  the  poor  rates,  a  much  larger  amount  falls  on  the  farmer  than 
on  the  manufacturer,  in  proportion  to  their  respective  profits; 
the  farmer  being  rated  according  to  the  actual  productions 
which  he  obtains,  the  manufacturer  only  according  to  the  value 
of  the  buildings  in  which  he  works,  without  any  regard  to  the 
value  of  the  machinery,  labour,  or  stock  which  he  may  employ. 
From  this  circumstance  it  follows  that  the  farmer  will  be 
enabled  to  raise  the  price  of  his  produce  by  this  whole  difference. 
For  since  the  tax  falls  unequally,  and  peculiarly  on  his  profits, 
he  would  have  less  motive  to  devote  his  capital  to  the  land 
than  to  employ  it  in  some  other  trade,  were  not  the  price  of 
raw  produce  raised.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  rate  had  fallen 
with  greater  weight  on  the  manufacturer  than  on  the  farmer, 
he  would  have  been  enabled  to  raise  the  price  of  his  goods  by 
the  amount  of  the  difference,  for  the  same  reason  that  the  farmer 
under  similar  circumstances  could  raise  the  price  of  raw  produce. 
In  a  society,  therefore,  which  is  extending  its  agriculture,  when 
poor  rates  fall  with  peculiar  weight  on  the  land,  they  will  be 
paid  partly  by  the  employers  of  capital  in  a  diminution  of  the 
profits  of  stock,  and  partly  by  the  consumer  of  raw  produce  in 
its  increased  price.  In  such  a  state  of  things,  the  tax  may, 
under  some  circumstances,  be  even  advantageous  rather  than 
injurious  to  landlords;  for  if  the  tax  paid  by  the  cultivator  of 
the  worst  land  be  higher  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  pro- 
duce obtained  than  that  paid  by  the  farmers  of  the  more  fertile 
lands,  the  rise  in  the  price  of  corn,  which  will  extend  to  all  corn, 
will  more  than  compensate  the  latter  for  the  tax.  This  advan- 
tage will  remain  with  them  during  the  continuance  of  their 
leases,  but  it  will  afterwards  be  transferred  to  their  landlords. 
This,  then,  would  be  the  effect  of  poor  rates  in  an  advancing 


■ 


174  Political  Economy 

society;  but  in  a  stationary,  or  in  a  retrograde  country 
as  capital  could  not  be  withdrawn  from  the  land,  if  a  further 
rate  were  levied  for  the  support  of  the  poor,  that  part  of  it  which 
fell  on  agriculture  would  be  paid,  during  the  current  leases,  by 
the  farmers;  but,  at  the  expiration  of  those  leases  it  would 
almost  wholly  fall  on  the  landlords.  The  farmer,  who,  during 
his  former  lease,  had  expended  his  capital  in  improving  his  land, 
if  it  were  still  in  his  own  lands,  would  be  rated  for  this  new  tax 
according  to  the  new  value  which  the  land  had  acquired  by  its 
improvement,  and  this  amount  he  would  be  obliged  to  pay 
during  his  lease,  although  his  profits  might  thereby  be  reduced 
below  the  general  rate  of  profits;  for  the  capital  which  he  has 
expended  may  be  so  incorporated  with  the  land  that  it  cannot 
be  removed  from  it.  If,  indeed,  he  or  his  landlord  (should  it 
have  been  expended  by  him)  were  able  to  remove  this  capital, 
and  thereby  reduce  the  annual  value  of  the  land,  the  rate  would 
proportionably  fall ;  and  as  the  produce  would  at  the  same  time 
be  diminished,  its  price  would  rise;  he  would  be  compensated 
for  the  tax  by  charging  it  to  the  consumer,  and  no  part  would 
fall  on  rent;  but  this  is  impossible,  at  least  with  respect  to  some 
proportion  of  the  capital,  and  consequently  in  that  proportion 
the  tax  will  be  paid  by  the  farmers  during  their  leases,  and  by 
landlords  at  their  expiration.  This  additional  tax,  if  it  fell 
with  peculiar  severity  on  manufacturers,  which  it  does  not, 
would,  under  such  circumstances,  be  added  to  the  price  of  their 
goods;  for  there  can  be  no  reason  why  their  profits  should  be 
reduced  below  the  general  rate  of  profits  when  their  capitals 
might  be  easily  removed  to  agriculture.^ 

'  In  a  former  part  of  this  work  I  have  noticed  the  difference  between 
rent,  properly  so  called,  and  the  remuneration  paid  to  the  landlord  under 
that  name  for  the  advantages  which  the  expenditure  of  his  capital  has 
procured  to  his  tenant;  but  I  did  not  perhaps  sufficiently  distinguish  the 
difference  which  would  arise  from  the  different  modes  in  which  this  capital 
might  be  applied.  As  a  part  of  this  capital,  when  once  expended  in  th€ 
improvement  of  a  farm,  is  inseparably  amalgamated  with  the  land,  anq 
tends  to  increase  its  productive  powers,  the  remuneration  paid  to  th< 
landlord  for  its  use  is  strictly  of  the  nature  of  rent,  and  is  subject  to 
the  laws  of  rent.  Whether  the  improvement  be  made  at  the  expense  of 
the  landlord  or  the  tenant,  it  will  not  be  undertaken  in  the  first  instance 
unless  there  is  a  strong  probability  that  the  return  will  at  least  be  equal  to 
the  profit  that  can  be  made  by  the  disposition  of  any  other  equal  capital; 
but  when  once  made,  the  return  obtained  will  ever  after  be  wholly  of  the 
nature  of  rent,  and  will  be  subject  to  all  the  variations  of  rent.  Some  of 
these  expenses,  however,  only  give  advantages  to  the  land  for  a  limited 
period,  and  do  not  add  permanently  to  its  productive  powers:  being 
bestowed  on  buildings,  and  other  perishable  improvements,  they  require 
to  be  constantly  renewed,  and  therefore  do  not  obtain  for  the  landlord  any 
permanent  addition  to  his  real  rent. 


CHAPTER  XIX 

ON  SUDDEN  CHANGES  IN  THE  CHANNELS  OF  TRADE 

A  GREAT  manufacturing  country  is  peculiarly  exposed  to  tem- 
porary reverses  and  contingencies,  produced  by  the  removal 
of  capital  from  one  employment  to  another.  The  demands  for 
the  produce  of  agriculture  are  uniform ;  they  are  not  under  the 
influence  of  fashion,  prejudice,  or  caprice.  To  sustain  life,  food 
is  necessary,  and  the  demand  for  food  must  continue  in  all  ages 
and  in  all  countries.  It  is  different  with  manufactures;  the 
demand  for  any  particular  manufactured  commodity  is  subject,, 
not  only  to  the  wants,  but  to  the  tastes  and  caprice  of  the 
purchasers.  A  new  tax,  too,  may  destroy  the  comparative 
advantage  which  a  country  before  possessed  in  the  manufacture 
of  a  particular  commodity;  or  the  effects  of  war  may  so  raise 
the  freight  and  insurance  on  its  conveyance,  that  it  can  no 
longer  enter  into  competition  with  the  home  manufacture  of 
the  country  to  which  it  was  before  exported.  In  all  such  cases^ 
considerable  distress,  and  no  doubt  some  loss,  will  be  experi- 
enced by  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  manufacture  of  such 
commodities;  and  it  will  be  felt,  not  only  at  the  time  of  the 
change,  but  through  the  whole  interval  during  which  they  are 
removing  their  capitals,  and  the  labour  which  they  can  com- 
mand, from  one  employment  to  another. 

Nor  will  distress  be  experienced  in  that  country  alone  where 
such  difficulties  originate,  but  in  the  countries  to  which  its 
commodities  were  before  exported.  No  country  can  long 
import,  unless  it  also  exports,  or  can  long  export  unless  it  also 
imports.  If,  then,  any  circumstance  should  occur  which 
should  permanently  prevent  a  country  from  importing  the 
usual  amount  of  foreign  commodities,  it  will  necessarily  diminish 
the  manufacture  of  some  of  those  commodities  which  were 
usually  exported ;  and  although  the  total  value  of  the  produc- 
tions of  the  country  will  probably  be  but  little  altered,  since  the 
same  capital  will  be  employed,  yet  they  will  not  be  equally  abund- 
ant and  cheap;  and  considerable  distress  will  be  experienced* 
through  the  change  of  employments.  If,  by  the  employment 
of  ^ir^ooo  in  the  manufacture  of  cotton  goods  for  exportation,, 

175 


176  Political  Economy 

we  imported  annually  3000  pair  of  silk  stockings  of  the  value 
of  £2000,  and  by  the  interruption  of  foreign  trade  we  should 
be  obliged  to  withdraw  this  capital  from  the  manufacture  of 
cotton,  and  employ  it  ourselves  in  the  manufacture  of  stock- 
ings, we  should  still  obtain  stockings  of  the  value  of  £2000, 
provided  no  part  of  the  capital  were  destroyed ;  but  instead  of 
having  3000  pair,  we  might  only  have  2500,  In  the  removal 
of  the  capital  from  the  cotton  to  the  stocking  trade,  much 
distress  might  be  experienced,  but  it  would  not  considerably 
impair  the  value  of  the  national  property,  although  it  might 
lessen  the  quantity  of  our  annual  productions.^ 

The  commencement  of  war  after  a  long  peace,  or  of  peace 
after  a  long  war,  generally  produces  considerable  distress  in 
trade.  It  changes  in  a  great  degree  the  nature  of  the  employ- 
ments to  which  the  respective  capitals  of  countries  were  before 
devoted ;  and  during  the  inter\'al  while  they  are  settling  in  the 
situations  which  new  circumstances  have  made  the  most  bene- 
ficial, much  fixed  capital  is  unemployed,  perhaps  wholly  lost, 
and  labourers  are  without  full  employment.  The  duration  of 
this  distress  will  be  longer  or  shorter  according  to  the  strength 
of  that  disinclination  which  most  men  feel  to  abandon  that 
employment  of  their  capital  to  which  they  have  long  been 
accustomed.  It  is  often  protracted,  too,  by  the  restrictions 
and  prohibitions  to  which  the  absurd  jealousies  which  prevail 
between  the  different  states  of  the  commercial  commonwealth 
give  rise. 

The  distress  which  proceeds  from  a  revulsion  of  trade  is  often 
mistaken  for  that  which  accompanies  a  diminution  of  the 
national  capital  and  a  retrograde  state  of  society;  and  it  would 
perhaps  be  difficult  to  point  out  any  marks  by  which  they  may 
be  accurately  distinguished. 

When,  however,  such  distress  immediately  accompanies  a 

*  "  Commerce  enables  us  to  obtain  a  commodity  in  the  place  where  it  is 
to  be  found,  and  to  convey  it  to  another  where  it  is  to  be  consumed;  it 
therefore  gives  us  the  power  of  increasing  the  value  of  the  commodity^ 
by  the  whole  difference  between  its  price  in  the  first  of  these  places  am 
its  price  in  the  second." — M.  Say,  p.  458,  vol.  ii. — True,  but  how  is  thii 
additional  value  given  to  it?  By  adding  to  the  cost  of  production,  first 
the  expenses  of  conveyance;  secondly,  the  profit  on  the  advances  a 
capital  made  by  the  merchant.  The  commodity  is  only  more  valuabl 
for  the  same  reasons  that  every  other  commodity  may  become  mon 
valuable,  because  more  labour  is  expended  on  its  production  and  coaj 
veyance  before  it  is  purchased  by  the  consumer.  This  must  not  bc 
■mentioned  as  one  of  the  advantages  of  commerce.  When  the  subject  i| 
more  closely  examined,  it  \vill  be  found  that  the  whole  benefits  of  com 
merce  resolve  themselves  into  the  means  which  it  gives  us  of  acquirinf 
«iot  more  valuable  objects,  but  more  useful  ones. 


Sudden  Changed  in  the  Channels  of  Trade    177 

change  from  war  to  peace,  our  knowledge  of  the  existence  of 
such  a  cause  will  make  it  reasonable  to  believe  that  the  funds 
for  the  maintenance  of  labour  have  rather  been  diverted  from 
their  usual  channel  than  materially  impaired,  and  that,  after 
temporary  suffering,  the  nation  will  again  advance  in  prosperity. 
It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  the  retrograde  condition  is 
always  an  unnatural  state  of  society.  Man  from  youth  grows 
to  manhood,  then  decays,  and  dies ;  but  this  is  not  the  progress 
of  nations.  When  arrived  to  a  state  of  the  greatest  vigour, 
their  further  advance  may  indeed  be  arrested,  but  their  natural 
tendency  is  to  continue  for  ages  to  sustain  undiminished  their 
wealth  and  their  population. 

In  rich  and  powerful  countries,  where  large  capitals  are 
invested  in  machinery,  more  distress  will  be  experienced  from 
a  revulsion  in  trade  than  in  poorer  countries  where  there  is 
proportionally  a  much  smaller  amount  of  fixed,  and  a  much 
larger  amount  of  circulating  capital,  and  where  consequently 
more  work  is  done  by  the  labour  of  men.  It  is  not  so  difficult 
to  withdraw  a  circulating  as  a  fixed  capital  from  any  employ- 
ment in  which  it  may  be  engaged.  It  is  often  impossible  to 
divert  the  machinery  which  may  have  been  erected  for  one 
manufacture  to  the  purposes  of  another;  but  the  clothing,  the 
food,  and  the  lodging  of  the  labourer  in  one  employment  may 
be  devoted  to  the  support  of  the  labourer  in  another;  or  the 
same  labourer  may  receive  the  same  food,  clothing,  and  lodging, 
whilst  his  employment  is  changed.  This,  however,  is  an  evil 
to  which  a  rich  nation  must  submit;  and  it  would  not  be  more 
reasonable  to  complain  of  it  than  it  would  be  in  a  rich  merchant 
to  lament  that  his  ship  was  exposed  to  the  dangers  of  the  sea, 
whilst  his  poor  neighbour's  cottage  was  safe  from  all  such 
hazard. 

From  contingencies  of  this  kind,  though  in  an  inferior  degree, 
even  agriculture  is  not  exempted.  War,  which,  in  a  commercial 
country,  interrupts  the  commerce  of  states,  frequently  prevents 
the  exportation  of  corn  from  countries  where  it  can  be  produced 
with  little  cost  to  others  not  so  favourably  situated.  Under 
such  circumstances  an  unusual  quantity  of  capital  is  drawn  to 
agriculture,  and  the  country  which  before  imported  becomes 
independent  of  foreign  aid.  At  the  termination  of  the  war,  the 
obstacles  to  importation  are  removed,  and  a  competition 
destructive  to  the  home-grower  commences,  from  which  he  is 
unable  to  withdraw  without  the  sacrifice  of  a  great  part  of  his 
capital.    The  best  policy  of  the  state  would  be  to  lay  a  tax, 

M 


178  Political  Economy 

decreasing  in  amount  from  time  to  time,  on  the  importation  of 
foreign  com,  for  a  limited  number  of  years,  in  order  to  afford 
to  the  home-grower  an  opportunity  to  withdraw  his  capital 
gradually  from  the  land.^  In  so  doing,  the  country  might  not 
be  making  the  most  advantageous  distribution  of  its  capital, 
but  the  temporary  tax  to  which  it  was  subjected  would  be  for 
the  advantage  of  a  particular  class,  the  distribution  of  whose 
capital  was  highly  useful  in  procuring  a  supply  of  food  when 
importation  was  stopped.  If  such  exertions  in  a  period  of 
emergency  were  followed  by  a  risk  of  ruin  on  the  termination 
of  the  difficulty,  capital  would  shun  such  an  employment. 
Besides  the  usual  profits  of  stock,  farmers  would  expect  to  be 
compensated  for  the  risk  which  they  incurred  of  a  sudden  influx 
of  com;  and,  therefore,  the  price  to  the  consumer,  at  the 
seasons  when  he  most  required  a  supply,  would  be  enhanced, 
not  only  by  the  superior  cost  of  growing  corn  at  home,  but  also 
by  the  insurance  which  he  would  have  to  pay  in  the  price  for 
the  peculiar  risk  to  which  this  employment  of  capital  was 
exposed.  Notwithstanding,  then,  that  it  would  be  more  pro- 
ductive of  wealth  to  the  country,  at  whatever  sacrifice  of  capital 
it  might  be  done,  to  allow  the  importation  of  cheap  corn,  it 
would,  perhaps,  be  advisable  to  charge  it  with  a  duty  for  a  few 
years. 

In  examining  the  question  of  rent,  we  found  that,  with  every 
increase  in  the  supply  of  com,  and  with  the  consequent  fall 
its  price,  capital  would  be  withdrawn  from  the  poorer  land 
land  of  a  better  description,  which  would  then  pay  no  re: 

'  In  the  last  volume  of  the  supplement  to  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica, 
article  "  Corn  Laws  and  Trade,"  are  the  following  excellent  suggestions 
and  observations: — "  If  we  shall  at  any  future  period  think  of  retracing 
our  steps,  in  order  to  give  time  to  withdraw  capital  from  the  cultivation 
of  our  poor  soils,  and  to  invest  it  in  more  lucrative  employments,  a  gradually 
diminishing  scale  of  duties  may  be  adopted.  The  price  at  which  foreign 
grain  should  be  admitted  duty  free  may  be  made  to  decrease  from  805., 
its  present  limit,  by  45.  or  5s.  per  quarter  annually  till  it  reaches  505., 
when  the  ports  could  safely  be  thrown  open,  and  the  restrictive  system 
be  for  ever  abohshed.  When  this  happy  event  shall  have  taken  place,  it 
will  be  no  longer  necessary  to  force  nature.  The  capital  and  enterprise  of 
the  country  will  be  turned  into  those  departments  of  industry  in  which 
our  physical  situation,  national  character,  or  political  institutions  fit  us  to 
excel.  The  com  of  Poland  and  the  raw  cotton  of  Carolina  will  be  ex- 
changed for  the  wares  of  Birmingham  and  the  muslins  of  Glasgow.  The 
genuine  commercial  spirit,  that  which  permanently  secures  the  prosperity 
of  nations,  is  altogether  inconsistent  with  the  dark  and  shallow  policy  of 
monopoly.  The  nations  of  the  earth  are  like  provinces  of  the  same  king- 
dom— a  free  and  unfettered  intercourse  is  alike  productive  of  general  and 
of  local  advantage."  The  whole  article  is  well  worthy  of  attention;  it  is 
very  instructive,  is  ably  written,  and  shows  that  the  author  is  completely 
master  of  the  subject. 


en^' 


i 


Sudden  Changes  in  the  Channels  of  Trade    179 

would  become  the  standard  by  which  the  natural  price  of  corn 
would  be  regulated.  At  £4  per  quarter,  land  of  an  inferior 
quality,  which  may  be  designated  by  No.  6,  might  be  cultivated ; 
at  £3  105.,  No.  5;  at  £3,  No.  4,  and  so  on.  If  corn,  in  conse- 
quence of  permanent  abundance,  fell  to  £3  lo^.,  the  capital 
employed  on  No.  6  would  cease  to  be  employed ;  for  it  was  only 
when  corn  was  at  £4  that  it  could  obtain  the  general  profits, 
even  without  paying  rent:  it  would,  therefore,  be  withdrawn 
to  manufacture  those  commodities  with  which  all  the  com 
grown  on  No.  6  would  be  purchased  and  imported.  In  this 
employment  it  would  necessarily  be  more  productive  to  its 
owner,  or  it  would  not  be  withdrawn  from  the  other;  for  if  he 
could  not  obtain  more  com  by  purchasing  it  with  a  commodity 
which  he  manufactured  than  he  got  from  the  land  for  which  he 
paid  no  rent,  its  price  could  not  be  under  £4. 

It  has,  however,  been  said,  that  capital  cannot  be  withdrawn 
from  the  land;  that  it  takes  the  form  of  expenses  which  cannot 
be  recovered,  such  as  manuring,  fencing,  draining,  etc.,  which 
are  necessarily  inseparable  from  tlie  land.  This  is  in  some 
degree  true;  but  that  capital  which  consists  of  cattle,  sheep, 
hay  and  corn  ricks,  carts,  etc.,  may  be  withdrawn;  and  it 
always  becomes  a  matter  of  calculation  whether  these  shall 
continue  to  be  employed  on  the  land,  notwithstanding  the  low 
price  of  corn,  or  whether  they  shall  be  sold,  and  their  value 
transferred  to  another  employment. 

Suppose,  however,  the  fact  to  be  as  stated,  and  that  no  part 
of  the  capital  could  be  withdrawn ;  ^  the  farmer  would  continue 
to  raise  corn,  and  precisely  the  same  quantity,  too,  at  whatever 
price  it  might  sell;   for  it  could  not  be  his  interest  to  produce 

^  Whatever  capital  becomes  fixed  on  the  land  must  necessarily  be  the 
landlord's,  and  not  the  tenant's,  at  the  expiration  of  the  lease.  Whatever 
compensation  the  landlord  may  receive  for  this  capital  on  re-letting  his 
land  will  appear  in  the  form  of  rent;  but  no  rent  will  be  paid  if,  with  a 
given  capital,  more  com  can  be  obtained  from  abroad  than  can  be  grown 
on  this  land  at  home.  If  the  circumstances  of  the  society  should  require 
corn  to  be  imported,  and  looo  quarters  can  be  obtained  by  the  employ- 
ment of  a  given  capital,  and  if  this  land,  with  the  employment  of  the  same 
capital,  will  yield  iioo  quarters,  loo  quarters  will  necessarily  go  to  rent; 
but  if  1200  can  be  got  from  abroad,  then  this  land  will  go  out  of  cultivation, 
for  it  will  not  then  yield  even  the  general  rate  of  profit.  But  this  is  no 
disadvantage,  however  great  the  capital  may  have  been  that  had  been 
expended  on  the  land.  Such  capital  is  spent  with  a  view  to  augment  the 
produce — that,  it  should  be  remembered,  is  the  end;  of  what  importance, 
then,  can  it  be  to  the  society  whether  half  its  capital  be  sunk  in  value,  or 
even  annihilated,  if  they  obtain  a  great  annual  quantity  of  production? 
Those  who  deplore  the  loss  of  capital  in  this  case  are  for  sacrificing  the  end 
to  the  means. 


i8o  Political  Economy 

less,  and  if  he  did  not  so  employ  his  capital,  he  would  obtain 
from  it  no  return  whatever.  Com  would  not  be  imported, 
because  he  would  sell  it  lower  than  £3  los.  rather  than  not  sell 
it  at  all,  and  by  the  supposition  the  importer  could  not  sell  it 
under  that  price.  Although,  then,  the  farmers,  who  cultivated 
land  of  this  quality,  would  undoubtedly  be  injured  by  the  fall 
in  the  exchangeable  value  of  the  commodity  which  they  pro- 
duced— how  would  the  country  be  affected?  We  should  have 
precisely  the  same  quantity  of  every  commodity  produced,  but 
raw  produce  and  corn  would  sell  at  a  much  cheaper  price.  The 
capital  of  a  country  consists  of  its  commodities,  and  as  these 
would  be  the  same  as  before,  reproduction  would  go  on  at  the 
same  rate.  This  low  price  of  corii  would,  however,  only  afford 
the  usual  profits  of  stock  to  the  land  No.  5,  which  would  then 
pay  no  rent,  and  the  rent  of  all  better  land  would  fall:  wages 
would  also  fall,  and  profits  would  rise. 

However  low  the  price  of  corn  might  fall,  if  capital  could  not 
be  removed  from  the  land,  and  the  demand  did  not  increase,  no 
importation  would  take  place,  for  the  same  quantity  as  before 
would  be  produced  at  home.  Although  there  would  be  a 
different  division  of  the  produce,  and  some  classes  would  be 
benefited  and  others  injured,  the  aggregate  of  production  would 
be  precisely  the  same,  and  the  nation  collectively  would  neither^ 
be  richer  nor  poorer.  fl 

But  there  is  this  advantage  always  resulting  from  a  relatively™ 
low  price  of  com — that  the  division  of  the  actual  production  is 
more  likely  to  increase  the  fund  for  the  maintenance  of  labour, 
inasmuch  as  more  will  be  allotted,  under  the  name  of  profit, 
to  the  productive  class  —  a  less,  under  the  name  rent,  to  the 
unproductive  class. 

This  is  true,  even  if  the  capital  cannot  be  withdrawn  from  the 
land,  and  must  be  employed  there,  or  not  be  employed  at  all; 
but  if  great  part  of  the  capital  can  be  withdrawn,  as  it  evidently 
could,  it  will  be  only  withdrawn  when  it  will  yield  more  to  the 
owner  by  being  withdrawn  than  by  being  suffered  to  remain 
where  it  was;  it  will  only  be  withdrawn  then,  when  it  can  else- 
where be  employed  more  productively  both  for  the  owner  and 
the  public.  He  consents  to  sink  that  part  of  his  capital  which 
cannot  be  separated  from  the  land,  because  with  that  part 
which  he  can  take  away  he  can  obtain  a  greater  value,  and  a 
greater  quantity  of  raw  produce,  than  by  not  sinking  this  part 
of  the  capital.  His  case  is  precisely  similar  to  that  of  a  man 
who  has  erected  machinery  in  his  manufactory  at  a  great 


ii 


I 


Sudden  Changes  in  the  Channels  of  Trade    1 8 1 

expense,  machinery  which  is  afterwards  so  much  improved  upon 
by  more  modern  inventions  that  the  commodities  manufactured 
by  him  very  much  sink  in  value.  It  would  be  entirely  a  matter 
of  calculation  with  him  whether  he  should  abandon  the  old 
machinery,  and  erect  the  more  perfect,  losing  all  the  value  of 
the  old,  or  continue  to  avail  himself  of  its  comparatively  feeble 
powers.  Who,  under  such  circumstances,  would  exhort  him  to 
forego  the  use  of  the  better  machinery,  because  it  would  deterior- 
ate or  annihilate  the  value  of  the  old  ?  Yet,  this  is  the  argument 
of  those  who  would  wish  us  to  prohibit  the  importation  of  com, 
because  it  will  deteriorate  or  annihilate  that  part  of  the  capital 
of  the  farmer  which  is  for  ever  sunk  in  land.  They  do  not 
see  that  the  end  of  all  commerce  is  to  increase  production,  and 
that,  by  increasing  production,  though  you  may  occasion  partial 
loss,  you  increase  the  general  happiness.  To  be  consistent,  they 
should  endeavour  to  arrest  all  improvements  in  agriculture  and 
manufactures,  and  all  inventions  of  machinery;  for,  though 
these  contribute  to  general  abundance,  and  therefore  to  the 
general  happiness,  they  never  fail,  at  the  moment  of  their  intro- 
duction, to  deteriorate  or  annihilate  the  value  of  a  part  of  the 
existing  capital  of  farmers  and  manufacturers.^ 

Agriculture,  like  all  the  other  trades,  and  particularly  in  a 
commercial  country,  is  subject  to  a  reaction,  which,  in  an 
opposite  direction,  succeeds  the  action  of  a  strong  stimulus. 
Thus,  when  war  interrupts  the  importation  of  com,  its  conse- 
quent high  price  attracts  capital  to  the  land,  from  the  large 
profits  which  such  an  employment  of  it  affords;  this  will  pro- 
bably cause  more  capital  to  be  employed,  and  more  raw  produce 
to  be  brought  to  market  than  the  demands  of  the  country 
require.  In  such  case,  the  price  of  corn  will  fall  from  the  effects 
of  a  glut,  and  much  agricultural  distress  will  be  produced,  till 
the  average  supply  is  brought  to  a  level  with  the  average  demand. 

^  Among  the  most  able  of  the  publications  on  the  impolicy  of  restricting 
the  importation  of  corn  may  be  classed  Major  Torrens*  Essay  on  the 
External  Corn  Trade.  His  arguments  appear  to  me  to  be  unanswered, 
and  to  be  unanswerable. 


CHAPTER  XX 

VALUE  AND  RICHES,  THEIR  DISTINCTIVE   PROPERTIES 

"  A  MAN  is  rich  or  poor,"  says  Adam  Smith,  *'  according  to  the 
degree  in  which  he  can  afford  to  enjoy  the  necessaries,  con- 
veniences, and  amusements  of  human  life." 

Value,  then,  essentially  differs  from  riches,  for  value  depends 
not  on  abundance,  but  on  the  difficulty  or  facility  of  production. 
The  labour  of  a  million  of  men  in  manufactures  will  always 
produce  the  same  value,  but  will  not  always  produce  the  same 
riches.  By  the  invention  of  machinery,  by  improvements  in 
skill,  by  a  better  division  of  labour,  or  by  the  discovery  of  new 
markets,  where  more  advantageous  exchanges  may  be  made, 
a  million  of  men  may  produce  double  or  treble  the  amount  of 
riches,  of  '*  necessaries,  conveniences,  and  amusements,"  in  one 
state  of  society  that  they  could  produce  in  another,  but  they 
will  not  on  that  account  add  anything  to  value ;  for  everything 
rises  or  falls  in  value  in  proportion  to  the  facility  or  difficulty 
of  producing  it,  or,  in  other  words,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity 
of  labour  employed  on  its  production.  Suppose,  with  a  given 
capital,  the  labour  of  a  certain  number  of  men  produced  looo 
pair  of  stockings,  and  that  by  inventions  in  machinery  the  same 
number  of  men  can  produce  2000  pair,  or  that  they  can  continue 
to  produce  1000  pair,  and  can  produce  besides  500  hats;  then 
the  value  of  the  2000  pair  of  stockings,  or  of  the  1000  pair  of 
stockings  and  500  hats,  will  be  neither  more  nor  less  than  that 
of  the  1000  pair  of  stockings  before  the  introduction  of  machinery ; 
for  they  will  be  the  produce  of  the  same  quantity  of  labour. 
But  the  value  of  the  general  mass  of  commodities  will  neverthe- 
less be  diminished;  for,  although  the  value  of  the  increased 
quantity  produced  in  consequence  of  the  improvement  will  be 
the  same  exactly  as  the  value  would  have  been  of  the  less 
quantity  that  would  have  been  produced,  had  no  improvement 
taken  place,  an  effect  is  also  produced  on  the  portion  of  goods 
still  unconsumed,  which  were  manufactured  previously  to  the 
improvement;  the  value  of  those  goods  will  be  reduced,  inas- 
much as  they  must  fall  to  the  level,  quantity  for  quantity,  of 
the  goods  produced  under  all  the  advantages  of  the  improve- 

i8r2 


I 


Value  and  Riches  183 

ment:  and  the  society  will,  notwithstanding  the  increased 
quantity  of  commodities,  notwithstanding  its  augmented  riches, 
and  its  augmented  means  of  enjoyment,  have  a  less  amount  of 
value.  By  constantly  increasing  the  facility  of  production,  we 
constantly  diminish  the  value  of  some  of  the  commodities  before 
produced,  though  by  the  same  means  we  not  only  add  to  the 
national  riches,  but  also  to  the  power  of  future  production. 
Many  of  the  errors  in  political  economy  have  arisen  from  errors 
on  this  subject,  from  considering  an  increase  of  riches,  and  an 
increase  of  value,  as  meaning  the  same  thing,  and  from  un- 
founded notions  as  to  what  constituted  a  standard  measure  of 
value.  One  man  considers  money  as  a  standard  of  value,  and 
a  nation  grows  richer  or  poorer,  according  to  him,  in  proportion 
as  its  commodities  of  all  kinds  can  exchange  for  more  or  less 
money.  Others  represent  money  as  a  very  convenient  medium 
for  the  purpose  of  barter,  but  not  as  a  proper  measure  by  which 
to  estimate  the  value  of  other  things ;  the  real  measure  of  value 
according  to  them  is  corn,^  and  a  country  is  rich  or  poor  accord- 
ing as  its  commodities  will  exchange  for  more  or  less  corn.^ 
There  are  others  again  who  consider  a  country  rich  or  poor 
according  to  the  quantity  of  labour  that  it  can  purchase.  But 
why  should  gold,  or  corn,  or  labour,  be  the  standard  measure  of 
value,  more  than  coals  or  iron  ? — more  than  cloth,  soap,  candles, 
and  the  other  necessities  of  the  labourer? — why,  in  short, 
should  any  commodity,  or  all  commodities  together,  be  the 
standard,  when  such  a  standard  is  itself  subject  to  fluctuations 
in  value.?  Corn,  as  well  as  gold,  may  from  difficulty  or  facility 
of  production  vary  lo,  20,  or  30  per  cent,  relatively  to  other 
things ;  why  should  we  always  say  that  it  is  those  other  things 
which  have  varied,  and  not  the  corn  ?  That  commodity  is  alone 
invariable  which  at  all  times  requires  the  same  sacrifice  of  toil 
and  labour  to  produce  it.  Of  such  a  commodity  we  have  no 
knowledge,  but  we  may  hypothetically  argue  and  speak  about 
it  as  if  we  had ;  and  may  improve  our  knowledge  of  the  science 

*  Adam  Smith  says,  "that  the  difference  between  the  real  and  the 
nominal  price  of  commodities  and  labour  is  not  a  matter  of  mere  specula- 
tion, but  may  sometimes  be  of  considerable  use  in  practice."  I  agree  with 
him;  but  the  real  price  of  labour  and  commodities  is  no  more  to  be  ascer- 
tained by  their  price  in  goods,  Adam  Smith's  real  measure,  than  by  their 
price  in  gold  and  silver,  his  nominal  measure.  The  labourer  is  only  paid 
a  really  high  price  for  his  labour  when  his  wages  will  purchase  the  produce 
of  a  great  deal  of  labour. 

•  In  vol.  i.  p.  108,  M.  Say  infers  that  silver  is  now  of  the  same  value 
as  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  "  because  the  same  quantity  of  silver  will 
buy  the  same  quantity  of  corn." 


184  Political  Economy 

by  showing  distinctly  the  absolute  inapplicability  of  all 
standards  which  have  been  hitherto  adopted.  But  supposing 
either  of  these  to  be  a  correct  standard  of  value,  still  it  would 
not  be  a  standard  of  riches,  for  riches  do  not  depend  on  value. 
A  man  is  rich  or  poor  according  to  the  abundance  of  necessaries 
ajid  luxuries  which  he  can  command;  and  whether  the  ex- 
changeable value  of  these  for  money,  for  corn,  or  for  labour  be 
high  or  low,  they  will  equally  contribute  to  the  enjoyment  of  their 
possessor.  It  is  through  confounding  the  ideas  of  value  and 
wealth,  or  riches,  that  it  has  been  asserted  that  by  diminishing 
the  quantity  of  commodities,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  necessaries, 
conveniences,  and  enjoyments  of  human  life,  riches  may  be 
increased.  If  value  were  the  measure  of  riches,  this  could  not 
be  denied,  because  by  scarcity  the  value  of  commodities  is 
raised;  but  if  Adam  Smith  be  correct,  if  riches  consist  in  neces- 
saries and  enjoyments,  then  they  cannot  be  increased  by  a 
diminution  of  quantity. 

It  is  true  that  the  man  in  possession  of  a  scarce  commodity 
is  richer,  if  by  means  of  it  he  can  command  more  of  the  neces- 
saries and  enjoyments  of  human  life;  but  as  the  general  stock 
out  of  which  each  man's  riches  are  drawn  is  diminished  in 
quantity  by  all  that  any  individual  takes  from  it,  other  men's 
shares  must  necessarily  be  reduced  in  proportion  as  this  favoured 
individual  is  able  to  appropriate  a  greater  quantity  to  himself. 

Let  water  become  scarce,  says  Lord  Lauderdale,  and  be 
exclusively  possessed  by  an  individual,  and  you  will  increase 
his  riches,  because  water  will  then  have  value;  and  if  wealth 
be  the  aggregate  of  individual  riches,  you  will  by  the  same  means 
also  increase  wealth.  You  undoubtedly  will  increase  the  riches 
of  this  individual,  but  inasmuch  as  the  farmer  must  sell  a  part 
of  his  com,  the  shoemaker  a  part  of  his  shoes,  and  all  men  give 
up  a  portion  of  their  possessions  for  the  sole  purpose  of  supplying 
themselves  with  water,  which  they  before  had  for  nothing,  they 
are  poorer  by  the  whole  quantity  of  commodities  which  they 
are  obliged  to  devote  to  this  purpose,  and  the  proprietor  of  water 
is  benefited  precisely  by  the  amount  of  their  loss.  The  same 
quantity  of  water,  and  the  same  quantity  of  commodities,  are 
enjoyed  by  the  whole  society,  but  they  are  differently  distri- 
buted. This  is,  however,  supposing  rather  a  monopoly  of  water 
than  a  scarcity  of  it.  If  it  should  be  scarce,  then  the  riches  of 
the  country  and  of  individuals  would  be  actually  diminished, 
inasmuch  as  it  would  be  deprived  of  a  portion  of  one  of  its 
enjoyments.    The  farmer  would  not  only  have  less  com  to 


1 

the  ■ 


I 


Value  and  Riches  185 

exchange  for  the  other  commodities  which  might  be  necessary 
or  desirable  to  him,  but  he,  and  every  other  individual,  would 
be  abridged  in  the  enjoyment  of  one  of  the  most  essential  of 
their  comforts.  Not  only  would  there  be  a  different  distribution 
of  riches,  but  an  actual  loss  of  wealth. 

It  may  be  said,  then,  of  two  countries  possessing  precisely  the 
same  quantity  of  all  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of  life,  that 
they  are  equally  rich,  but  the  value  of  their  respective  riches 
would  depend  on  the  comparative  facility  or  difficulty  witli 
which  they  were  produced.  For  if  an  improved  piece  of 
machinery  should  enable  us  to  make  two  pair  of  stockings 
instead  of  one,  without  additional  labour,  double  the  quantit)'^ 
would  be  given  in  exchange  for  a  yard  of  cloth.  If  a  similar 
improvement  be  made  in  the  manufacture  of  cloth,  stockings 
and  cloth  will  exchange  in  the  same  proportions  as  before,  but 
they  will  both  have  fallen  in  value ;  for  in  exchanging  them  for 
hats,  for  gold,  or  other  commodities  in  general,  twice  the  former 
quantity  must  be  given.  Extend  the  improvement  to  the  pro- 
duction of  gold,  and  every  other  commodity,  and  they  will  all 
regain  tlieir  former  proportions.  There  will  be  double  the 
quantity  of  commodities  annually  produced  in  the  country, 
and  therefore  the  wealth  of  the  country  will  be  doubled,  but  this 
wealth  will  not  have  increased  in  value. 

Although  Adam  Smith  has  given  the  correct  description  of 
riches  which  I  have  more  than  once  noticed,  he  aftenvards 
explains  them  differently,  and  says,  '*  that  a  man  must  be  rich 
or  poor  according  to  the  quantity  of  labour  which  he  can  afford 
to  purchase."  Now,  this  description  differs  essentially  from 
the  other,  and  is  certainly  incorrect;  for  suppose  the  mines  were 
to  become  more  productive,  so  that  gold  and  silver  fell  in  value, 
from  the  greater  facility  of  their  production;  or  that  velvets 
were  to  be  manufactured  with  so  much  less  labour  than  before, 
that  they  fell  to  half  their  former  value ;  the  riches  of  all  those 
who  purchased  those  commodities  would  be  increased;  one 
man  might  increase  the  quantity  of  his  plate,  another  might  bu}^ 
double  the  quantity  of  velvet;  but  with  the  possession  of  this 
additional  plate  and  velvet,  they  could  employ  no  more  labour 
than  before;  because,  as  the  exchangeable  value  of  velvet  and 
of  plate  would  be  lowered,  they  must  part  with  proportionally 
more  of  these  species  of  riches  to  purchase  a  day's  labour. 
Riches,  then,  cannot  be  estimated  by  the  quantity  of  labour 
which  they  can  purchase. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  wealth  of  a 


1 86  Political  Economy 

country  may  be  increased  in  two  ways :  it  may  be  increased 
employing  a  greater  portion  of  revenue  in  the  maintenance  of 
productive  labour,  which  will  not  only  add  to  the  quantity,  but 
to  the  value  of  the  mass  of  commodities ;  or  it  may  be  increased, 
without  employing  any  additional  quantity  of  labour,  by  making 
the  same  quantity  more  productive,  which  will  add  to  the 
abundance,  but  not  to  the  value  of  commodities. 

In  the  first  case,  a  country  would  not  only  become  rich,  but  the 
value  of  its  riches  would  increase.  It  would  become  rich  by 
parsimony — by  diminishing  its  expenditure  on  objects  of  luxury 
and  enjoyment,  and  employing  those  savings  in  reproduction. 

In  the  second  case,  there  will  not  necessarily  be  either  any 
diminished  expenditure  on  luxuries  and  enjoyments,  or  any 
increased  quantity  of  productive  labour  employed,  but,  with 
the  same  labour,  more  would  be  produced;  wealth  would 
increase,  but  not  value.  Of  these  two  modes  of  increasing 
wealth,  the  last  must  be  preferred,  since  it  produces  the  same 
effect  without  the  privation  and  diminution  of  enjoyments 
which  can  never  fail  to  accompany  the  first  mode.  Capital  is 
that  part  of  the  wealth  of  a  country  which  is  employed  with  a 
view  to  future  production,  and  may  be  increased  in  the  same 
manner  as  wealth.  An  additional  capital  will  be  equally 
efficacious  in  the  production  of  future  wealth,  whether  it  be 
obtained  from  improvements  in  skill  and  machinery,  or  from 
using  more  revenue  reproductively ;  for  wealth  always  depends 
on  the  quantity  of  commodities  produced,  without  any  regard 
to  the  facility  with  which  the  instruments  employed  in  produc- 
tion may  have  been  procured.  A  certain  quantity  of  clothes 
and  provisions  will  maintain  and  employ  the  same  number  of 
men,  and  will  therefore  procure  the  same  quantity  of  work  to 
be  done,  whether  they  be  produced  by  the  labour  of  loo  or  200 
men;  but  they  will  be  of  twice  the  value  if  200  have  been 
employed  on  their  production. 

M.  Say,  notwithstanding  the  corrections  he  has  made  in  the 
fourth  and  last  edition  of  his  work,  Traite  d'Economie  Politique, 
appears  to  me  to  have  been  singularly  unfortunate  in  his  defini- 
tion of  riches  and  value.  He  considers  these  two  terms  as 
synonymous,  and  that  a  man  is  rich  in  proportion  as  he  increases 
the  value  of  his  possessions,  and  is  enabled  to  command  an 
abundance  of  commodities.  "  The  value  of  incomes  is  then 
increased,"  he  observes,  *'  if  they  can  procure,  it  does  not  signify 
by  what  means,  a  greater  quantity  of  products."  According 
to  M.  Say,  if  the  difficulty  of  producing  cloth  were  to  double, 


by  W 


Value  and  Riches  187 

and  consequently  cloth  was  to  exchange  for  double  the  quantity 
of  the  commodities  for  which  it  is  exchanged  before,  it  would  be 
doubled  in  value,  to  which  I  give  my  fullest  assent;  but  if  there 
were  any  peculiar  facility  in  producing  the  commodities,  and  no 
increased  difficulty  in  producing  cloth,  and  cloth  should  in 
consequence  exchange  as  before  for  double  the  quantity  of 
commodities,  M.  Say  would  still  say  that  cloth  had  doubled  in 
value,  whereas,  according  to  my  view  of  the  subject,  he  should 
say,  that  cloth  retained  its  former  value,  and  those  particular 
commodities  had  fallen  to  half  their  former  value.  Must  not 
M.  Say  be  inconsistent  with  himself  when  he  says  that,  by 
facility  of  production,  two  sacks  of  corn  may  be  produced  by 
the  same  means  that  one  was  produced  before,  and  that  each 
sack  will  therefore  fall  to  half  its  former  value,  and  yet  maintain 
that  the  clothier  who  exchanges  his  cloth  for  two  sacks  of  corn 
will  obtain  double  the  value  he  before  obtained,  when  he  could 
only  get  one  sack  in  exchange  for  his  cloth.  If  two  sacks  be 
of  the  value  that  one  was  of  before,  he  evidently  obtains  the 
same  value  and  no  more — he  gets,  indeed,  double  the  quantity 
of  riches — double  the  quantity  of  utility— double  the  quantity 
of  what  Adam  Smith  calls  value  in  use,  but  not  double  the 
quantity  of  value,  and  therefore  M.  Say  cannot  be  right  in  con- 
sidering value,  riches,  and  utility  to  be  synonymous.  Indeed, 
there  are  many  parts  of  M.  Say's  work  to  which  I  can  confidently 
refer  in  support  of  the  doctrine  which  I  maintain  respecting  the 
essential  difference  between  value  and  riches,  although  it  must 
be  confessed  that  there  are  also  various  other  passages  in  which 
a  contrary  doctrine  is  maintained.  These  passages  I  cannot 
reconcile,  and  I  point  them  out  by  putting  them  in  opposition 
to  each  other,  that  M.  Say  may,  if  he  should  do  me  the  honour 
to  notice  these  observations  in  any  future  edition  of  his  work, 
give  such  explanations  of  his  views  as  may  remove  the  difficulty 
which  many  others,  as  well  as  myself,  feel  in  our  endeavours  to 
expound  them. 

1.  In  the  exchange  of  two  pro-  sumed  to  create  a  product 
ducts,  we  only  in  fact  exchange  constitute  the  cost  of  produc- 
the  productive  services  which  tion  of  that  product  .  p.  505 
have  served  to  create  them.             4.  It  is  utility  which  determines 

p.  504  the  demand  for  a  commodity, 

2.  There  is  no  real  dearness  but  but  it  is  the  cost  of  its  pro- 
that  which  arises  from  the  cost  duction  which  limits  the  extent 
of  production.  A  thing  really  of  its  demand.  When  its 
dear  is  that  which  costs  much  utility  does  not  elevate  its 
in  producing    .          .        p.  497  value  to  the  level  of  the  cost  of 

3.  The  value  of  all  the  productive  production,  the  thing  is  not 
services    that    must    be    con-  worth  what  it  cost:    it  is  a 


1 88 


Political  Economy 


proof  that  the  productive  ser- 
vices might  be  employed  to 
create  a  coromodity  of  a 
superior  value.  The  posses- 
sors of  productive  funds,  that 
is  to  say,  those  who  have  the 
disposal  of  labour,  of  capital  or 
land,  are  perpetually  occupied 
in  comparing  the  cost  of  pro- 
duction with  the  value  of  the 
things  produced,  or,  which 
comes  to  the  same  thing,  in 
comparing  the  value  of  dif- 
ferent commodities  with  each 
other;  because  the  cost  of  pro- 
duction is  nothing  else  but  the 
value  of  productive  services, 
consumed  in  forming  a  pro- 
duction; and  the  value  of  a 
productive  service  is  nothing 
else  than  the  value  of  the  com- 
modity, which  is  the  result. 
The  value  of  a  commodity,  the 
value  of  a  productive  service, 
the  value  of  the  cost  of  pro- 
duction, are  all,  then,  similar 
values,  when  everything  is  left 
to  its  natural  course. 
The  value  of  incomes  is  then 
increased,  if  they  can  procure 
(it  does  not  signify  by  what 
means)  a  greater  quantity  of 
pro<lucts. 

Price  is  the  measure  of  the 
value  of  things,  and  their  value 
is  the  measure  of  their  utility. 
Vol.  2,  p.  4 
Exchanges  made  freely  show 
at  the  time,  in  the  place,  and 


in  the  state  of  society  in  which 
we  are  the  value  which  men 
attach  to  the  things  ex- 
changed .  .  p.  466 
To  produce,  is  to  create  value, 
by  giving  or  increasing  the 
utility  of  a  thing,  and  thereby 
establishing  a  demand  for  it, 
which  is  the  first  cause  of  its 
value  .  .  Vol.  2,  p.  487 
Utility  being  created,  con- 
stitutes a  product.  The  ex- 
changeable value  which  results 
is  only  the  measure  of  this 
utility,  the  measure  of  the  pro- 
duction which  has  taken  place, 
p.  490 
The  utility  which  people  of  a 
particular  country  find  in  a 
product  can  no  otherwise  be 
appreciated  than  by  the  price 
which  they  give  for  it  .  p.  502 
This  price  is  the  measure  of  the 
utility  which  it  has  in  the 
judgment  of  men;  of  the  satis- 
faction which  they  derive  from 
consuming  it,  because  they 
would  not  prefer  consuming 
this  utiHty,  if  for  the  price 
which  it  cost  they  could  acquire 
a  utility  which  would  give 
them  more  satisfaction  .  p.  506 
The  quantity  of  all  other  com- 
modities which  a  person  can 
immediately  obtain  in  exchange 
for  the  commodity  of  which  ho 
wishes  to  dispose,  is  at  all  times 
a  value  not  to  be  disputed. 
Vol.  2,  p.  4 


1 

ich      ~' 


If  there  is  no  real  deamess  but  that  which  arises  from  cost  of 
production  (see  2)  how  can  a  commodity  be  said  to  rise  in  value 
(see  5),  if  its  cost  of  production  be  not  increased  ?  and  merely 
because  it  will  exchange  for  more  of  a  cheap  commodity — for 
more  of  a  commodity  the  cost  of  production  of  which  has 
diminished?  When  I  give  2000  times  more  cloth  for  a  pound 
of  gold  than  I  give  for  a  pound  of  iron,  does  it  prove  that  I 
attach  2000  times  more  utility  to  gold  than  I  do  to  iron?  cer- 
tainly not;  it  proves  only  as  admitted  by  M,  Say  (see  4),  that  the 
cost  of  production  of  gold  is  2000  times  greater  than  the  cost  of 
production  of  iron.  If  the  cost  of  production  of  the  two  metals 
were  the  same,  I  should  give  the  same  price  for  them;  but  if 
utility  were  the  measure  of  value,  it  is  probable  I  should  give 
more  for  the  iron.     It  is  the  competition  of  the  producers  "  who 


Value  and  Riches  189 

are  perpetually  employed  in  comparing  the  cost  of  production 
with  the  value  of  the  thing  produced  "  (see  4)  which  regulates 
the  value  of  different  commodities.  If,  then,  I  give  one  shilling 
for  a  loaf,  and  21  shillings  for  a  guinea,  it  is  no  proof  that  this  in 
my  estimation  is  the  comparative  measure  of  their  utility. 

In  No.  4,  M.  Say  maintains,  with  scarcely  any  variation,  the 
doctrine  which  I  hold  concerning  value.  In  his  productive 
services  he  includes  the  services  rendered  by  land,  capital,  and 
labour;  in  mine  I  include  only  capital  and  labour,  and  wholly 
exclude  land.  Our  difference  proceeds  from  the  different  view 
which  we  take  of  rent:  I  always  consider  it  as  the  result  of  a 
partial  monopoly,  never  really  regulating  price,  but  rather  as 
the  effect  of  it.  If  all  rent  were  relinquished  by  landlords,  I 
am  of  opinion  that  the  commodities  produced  on  the  land 
would  be  no  cheaper,  because  there  is  always  a  portion  of  tlie 
same  commodities  produced  on  land  for  which  no  rent  is  or 
can  be  paid,  as  the  surplus  produce  is  only  sufficient  to  pay  the 
profits  of  stock. 

To  conclude,  although  no  one  is  more  disposed  than  I  am  to 
estimate  highly  the  advantage  which  results  to  all  classes  of  con- 
sumers from  the  real  abundance  and  cheapness  of  commodities, 
I  cannot  agree  with  M.  Say  in  estimating  the  value  of  a  com- 
modity by  the  abundance  of  other  commodities  for  which  it  will 
exchange;  I  am  of  the  opinion  of  a  very  distinguished  writer, 
M.  Destutt  de  Tracy,  who  says  that,  "  To  measure  any  one  thing 
is  to  compare  it  with  a  determinate  quantity  of  that  same  thing 
which  we  take  for  a  standard  of  comparison,  for  unity.  To 
measure,  then,  to  ascertain  a  length,  a  weight,  a  value,  is  to  find 
'how  many  times  they  contain  metres,  grammes,  francs,  in  a 
word,  unities  of  the  same  description."  A  franc  is  not  a  measure 
of  value  for  any  thing,  but  for  a  quantity  of  the  same  metal  of 
which  francs  are  made,  unless  francs,  and  the  thing  to  be 
measured,  can  be  referred  to  some  other  measure  which  is 
common  to  both.  This,  I  think,  they  can  be,  for  they  are  both 
the  result  of  labour;  and,  therefore,  labour  is  a  common  measure, 
by  which  their  real  as  well  as  their  relative  value  may  be  esti- 
mated. This  also,  I  am  happy  to  say,  appears  to  be  M.  Destutt 
de  Tracy's  opinion.^  He  says,  "  As  it  is  certain  that  our  physical 
and  moral  faculties  are  alone  our  original  riches,  the  employment 

^  Elemens  d' Ideologic,  vol.  iv.  p.  99. — In  this  work  M.  de  Tracy  has  given 
a  useful  and  an  able  treatise  on  the  general  principles  of  Political  Economy, 
and  I  am  sorry  to  be  obliged  to  add  that  he  supports,  by  his  authority, 
the  definitions  which  M.  Say  has  given  of  the  words  "  value,"  "  riches," 
and  "  utility." 


1 90  Political  Economy 

of  those  faculties,  labour  of  some  kind,  is  our  only  original 
treasure,  and  that  it  is  always  from  this  employment  that  all 
those  things  are  created  which  we  call  riches,  those  which  are 
the  most  necessary  as  well  as  those  which  are  the  most  purely 
agreeable.  It  is  certain  too,  that  all  those  things  only  represent 
the  labour  which  has  created  them,  and  if  they  have  a  value,  or 
even  two  distinct  values,  they  can  only  derive  them  from  that 
of  the  labour  from  which  they  emanate." 

M.  Say,  in  speaking  of  the  excellences  and  imperfections  of  the 
great  work  of  Adam  Smith,  imputes  to  him,  as  an  error,  that 
**  he  attributes  to  the  labour  of  man  alone  the  power  of  produc- 
ing value.  A  more  correct  analysis  shows  us  that  value  is  owing 
to  the  action  of  labour,  or  rather  the  industry  of  man,  combined 
with  the  action  of  those  agents  which  nature  supplies,  and  with 
that  of  capital.  His  ignorance  of  this  principle  prevented  him 
from  establishing  the  true  theory  of  the  influence  of  machinery 
in  the  production  of  riches." 

In  contradiction  to  the  opinion  of  Adam  Smith,  M.  Say,  in  the 
fourth  chapter,  speaks  of  the  value  which  is  given  to  commo- 
dities by  natural  agents,  such  as  the  sun,  the  air,  the  pressure 
of  the  atmosphere,  etc.,  which  are  sometimes  substituted  for 
the  labour  of  man,  and  sometimes  concur  with  him  in  producing.^ 
But  these  natural  agents,  though  they  add  greatly  to  value  in  use, 
never  add  exchangeable  value,  of  which  M.  Say  is  speaking,  to 
a  commodity:  as  soon  as  by  the  aid  of  machinery,  or  by  the 
knowledge  of  natural  philosophy,  you  oblige  natural  agents  to 
do  the  work  which  was  before  done  by  man,  the  exchangeable 
value  of  such  work  falls  accordingly.  If  ten  men  turned  a  com 
mill,  and  it  be  discovered  that  by  the  assistance  of  wind,  or  of 
water,  the  labour  of  these  ten  men  may  be  spared,  the  flour 
which  is  the  produce  partly  of  the  work  performed  by  the  mill, 

*  "  The  first  man  who  knew  how  to  soften  metals  by  fire  is  not  the 
creator  of  the  value  which  that  process  adds  to  the  melted  metal.  That 
value  is  the  result  of  the  physical  action  of  fire  added  to  the  industry  and 
capital  of  those  who  availed  themselves  of  this  knowledge." 

"  From  this  error  Smith  has  drawn  this  false  result,  that  the  value  of  all 
productions  represents  the  recent  or  former  labour  of  man,  or,  in  other 
words,  that  riches  are  nothing  else  but  accumulated  labour  ;  from  which,  by  a 
second  consequence,  equally  false,  labour  is  the  sole  measure  of  riches,  or  of 
the  value  of  productions." — Chap.  iv.  p.  31.  The  inferences  with  which 
M.  Say  concludes  are  his  own  and  not  Dr.  Smith's;  they  are  correct  if 
no  distinction  be  made  between  value  and  riches,  and  in  this  passage 
M.  Say  makes  none:  but  though  .\dam  Smith,  who  defined  riches  to 
consist  in  the  abundance  of  necessaries,  convenience,  and  enjoyments  of 
human  life,  would  have  allowed  that  machines  and  natural  agents  might 
very  greatly  add  to  the  riches  of  a  country,  he  would  not  have  allowed  that 
they  add  anything  to  the  value  of  those  riches. 


1 

nal     ■! 


Value  and  Riches  191 

would  immediately  fall  in  value,  in  proportion  to  the  quantity 
of  labour  saved;  and  the  society  would  be  richer  by  the  commo- 
dities which  the  labour  of  the  ten  men  could  produce,  the  funds 
destined  for  their  maintenance  being  in  no  degree  impaired. 
M.  Say  constantly  overlooks  the  essential  difference  that  there 
is  between  value  in  use  and  value  in  exchange. 

M.  Say  accuses  Dr.  Smith  of  having  overlooked  the  value 
which  is  given  to  commodities  by  natural  agents,  and  by 
machinery,  because  he  considered  that  the  value  of  all  things 
was  derived  from  the  labour  of  man;  but  it  does  not  appear 
to  me  that  this  charge  is  made  out;  for  Adam  Smith  nowhere 
undervalues  the  services  which  these  natural  agents  and 
machinery  perform  for  us,  but  he  very  justly  distinguishes  the 
nature  of  the. value  which  they  add  to  commodities — they  are 
serviceable  to  us,  by  increasing  the  abundance  of  productions, 
by  making  men  richer,  by  adding  to  value  in  use;  but  as  they 
perform  their  work  gratuitously,  as  nothing  is  paid  for  the  use 
of  air,  of  heat,  and  of  water,  the  assistance  which  they  afford  us 
adds  nothing  to  value  in  exchange. 


CHAPTER  XXI 

EFFECTS   OF  ACCUMULATION   ON   PROFITS   AND   INTEREST 

From  the  account  which  has  been  given  of  the  profits  of  stock,  it 
will  appear  that  no  accumulation  of  capital  will  permanently 
lower  profits  unless  there  be  some  permanent  cause  for  the  rise 
of  wages.  If  the  funds  for  the  maintenance  of  labour  were 
doubled,  trebled,  or  quadrupled,  there  would  not  long  be  any 
difficulty  in  procuring  the  requisite  number  of  hands  to  be 
employed  by  those  funds;  but  owing  to  the  increasing  difficulty 
of  making  constant  additions  to  the  food  of  the  country,  funds 
of  the  same  value  would  probably  not  maintain  the  same 
quantity  of  labour.  If  the  necessaries  of  the  workman  could 
be  constantly  increased  with  the  same  facility,  there  could  be  no 
permanent  alteration  in  the  rate  of  profit  or  wages,  to  whatever 
amount  capital  might  be  accumulated.  Adam  Smith,  however, 
uniformly  ascribes  the  fall  of  profits  to  the  accumulation  of 
capital,  and  to  the  competition  which  will  result  from  it,  without 
ever  adverting  to  the  increasing  difficulty  of  providing  food  for 
the  additional  number  of  labourers  which  the  additional  capital 
will  employ.  **  The  increase  of  stock,"  he  says,  "  which  raises 
wages,  tends  to  lower  profit.  When  the  stocks  of  many  rich 
merchants  are  turned  into  the  same  trade,  their  mutual  com- 
petition naturally  tends  to  lower  its  profit;  and  when  there 
is  a  like  increase  of  stock  in  all  the  different  trades  carried  on 
in  the  same  society,  the  same  competition  must  produce  the  same 
effect  in  all."  Adam  Smith  speaks  here  of  a  rise  of  wages,  but 
it  is  of  a  temporary  rise,  proceeding  from  increased  funds  before 
the  population  is  increased;  and  he  does  not  appear  to  see  that 
at  the  same  time  that  capital  is  increased  the  work  to  be  effected 
by  capital  is  increased  in  the  same  proportion.  M.  Say  has, 
however,  most  satisfactorily  shown  that  there  is  no  amount  of 
capital  which  may  not  be  employed  in  a  country,  because  a 
demand  is  only  limited  by  production.  No  man  produces  but 
with  a  view  to  consume  or  sell,  and  he  never  sells  but  with  an 
intention  to  purchase  some  other  commodity,  which  may  be 
immediately  useful  to  him,  or  which  may  contribute  to  future 
production.     By  producing,  then,  he  necessarily  becomes  either 

192 


Effects  of  Accumulation  on  Profits      193 

the  consumer  of  his  own  goods,  or  the  purchaser  and  consumer 
of  the  goods  of  some  other  person.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed 
that  he  should,  for  any  length  of  time,  be  ill-informed  of  the  com- 
modities which  he  can  most  advantageously  produce,  to  attain 
the  object  which  he  has  in  view,  namely,  the  possession  of  other 
goods ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  not  probable  that  he  will  continually 
produce  a  commodity  for  which  there  is  no  demand.^ 

There  cannot,  then,  be  accumulated  in  a  country  any  amount 
of  capital  which  cannot  be  employed  productively  until  wages 
rise  so  high  in  consequence  of  the  rise  of  necessaries,  and  so  little 
consequently  remains  for  the  profits  of  stock,  that  the  motive 
for  accumulation  ceases. ^  While  the  profits  of  stock  are  high, 
men  will  have  a  motive  to  accumulate.  Whilst  a  man  has  any 
wished-for  gratification  unsupplied,  he  will  have  a  demand  for 
more  commodities;  and  it  will  be  an  effectual  demand  while 
he  has  any  new  value  to  offer  in  exchange  for  them.  If  ten 
thousand  pounds  were  given  to  a  man  having  ^f  100,000  per 
annum,  he  would  not  lock  it  up  in  a  chest,  but  would  either 
increase  his  expenses  by  £10,000,  employ  it  himself  productively, 
or  lend  it  to  some  other  person  for  that  purpose;  in  either  case, 
demand  would  be  increased,  although  it  would  be  for  different 
objects.  If  he  increased  his  expenses,  his  effectual  demand 
might  probably  be  for  buildings,  furniture,  or  some  such  enjoy- 
ment. If  he  employed  his  £10,000  productively,  his  effectual 
demand  would  be  for  food,  clothing,  and  raw  material,  which 
might  set  new  labourers  to  work;  but  still  it  would  be  demand.'' 

^  Adam  Smith  speaks  of  Holland  as  affording  an  instance  of  the  fall  of 
profits  from  the  accumulation  of  capital,  and  from  every  employment 
being  consequently  overcharged.  "  The  government  there  borrow  at 
2  per  cent.,  and  private  people  of  good  credit  at  3  per  cent."  But  it 
should  be  remembered  that  Holland  was  obliged  to  import  almost  all  the 
corn  which  she  consumed,  and  by  imposing  heavy  taxes  on  the  necessaries 
of  the  labourer  she  further  raised  the  wages  of  labour.  These  facts  will 
sufficiently  account  for  the  low  rate  of  profits  and  interest  in  Holland. 

•  Is  the  following  quite  consistent  with  M.  Say's  principle?  "  The  more 
disposable  capitals  are  abundant  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  employ- 
ment for  them,  the  more  will  the  rate  of  interest  on  loans  of  capital  fall." — 
Vol.  ii.  p.  108.  If  capital  to  any  extent  can  be  employed  by  a  country, 
how  can  it  be  said  to  be  abxmdant,  compared  with  the  extent  of  employ- 
ment for  it  ? 

'  Adam  Smith  says  that,  "  When  the  produce  of  any  particular  branch 
of  industry  exceeds  what  the  demand  of  the  country  requires,  the  surplus 
must  be  sent  abroad,  and  exchanged  for  something  for  which  there  is  a 
demand  at  home.  Without  such  exportation,  a  part  of  the  productive  labour 
of  the  country  must  cease,  and  the  value  of  its  annual  produce  diminish.  The 
land  and  labour  of  Great  Britain  produce  generally  more  com,  woollens, 
and  hardware  than  the  demand  of  the  home  market  requires.  The  surplus 
part  of  them,  therefore,  must  be  sent  abroad,  and  exchanged  for  something 
for  which  there  is  a  demand  at  home.     It  is  only  by  means  of  such  exporta- 

N 


194  Political  Economy 

Productions  are  always  bought  by  productions,  or  by  services; 
money  is  only  the  medium  by  which  the  exchange  is  effected. 
Too  much  of  a  particular  commodity  may  be  produced,  of  which 
there  may  be  such  a  glut  in  the  market  as  not  to  repay  the 
capital  expended  on  it;  but  this  cannot  be  the  case  with  respect 
to  all  commodities ;  the  demand  for  corn  is  limited  by  the  mouths 
which  are  to  eat  it,  for  shoes  and  coats  by  the  persons  who  are 
to  wear  them;  but  though  a  community,  or  a  part  of  a  com- 
munity, may  have  as  much  com,  and  as  many  hats  and  shoes 
as  it  is  able,  or  may  wish  to  consume,  the  same  cannot  be  said 
of  every  commodity  produced  by  nature  or  by  art.  Some 
would  consume  more  wine  if  they  had  the  ability  to  procure  it. 
Others,  having  enough  of  wme,  would  wish  to  increase  the 
quantity  or  improve  the  quality  of  their  furniture.  Others 
might  wish  to  ornament  their  grounds,  or  to  enlarge  their  houses. 
The  wish  to  do  all  or  some  of  these  is  implanted  in  every  man's 
breast;  nothing  is  required  but  the  means,  and  nothing  can 
afford  the  means  but  an  increase  of  production.  If  I  had  food 
and  necessaries  at  my  disposal,  I  should  not  be  long  in  want  of 
workmen  who  would  put  me  in  possession  of  some  of  the  objects 
most  useful  or  most  desirable  to  me. 

Whether  these  increased  productions  and  the  consequent 
demand  which  they  occasion  shall  or  shall  not  lower  profits, 
depends  solely  on  the  rise  of  wages ;  and  the  rise  of  wages,  except- 
ing for  a  limited  period,  on  the  facility  of  producing  the  food 
and  necessaries  of  the  labourer.  I  say  excepting  for  a  limited 
period,  because  no  point  is  better  established,  than  that  the 
supply  of  labourers  will  alway-s  ultimately  be  in  proportion  to 
the  means  of  supporting  them. 

There  is  only  one  case,  and  that  will  be  temporary,  in  which 
the  accumulation  of  capital  with  a  low  price  of  food  may  be 
attended  with  a  fall  of  profits;  and  that  is  when  the  funds  for 
the  maintenance  of  labour  increase  much  more  rapidly  than 

tion  that  this  surplus  can  acquire  a  value  sufficient  to  compensate  the 
labour  and  expense  of  producing  it."  One  would  be  led  to  think  by  the 
above  passage  that  Adam  Smith  concluded  we  were  under  some  necessity 
of  producing  a  surplus  of  corn,  woollen  goods,  and  hardware,  and  that  the 
capital  which  produced  them  could  not  be  otherwise  employed.  It  is, 
however,  always  a  matter  of  choice  in  what  way  a  capital  shall  be  employed, 
and  therefore  there  can  never  for  any  length  of  time  be  a  surplus  of  any 
commodity;  for  if  there  were,  it  would  fall  below  its  natural  price,  and 
capital  would  be  removed  to  some  more  profitable  employment.  No 
writer  has  more  satisfactorily  and  ably  shown  than  Dr.  Smith  the  tendency 
of  capital  to  move  from  employments  in  which  the  goods  produced  do  not 
repay  by  their  price  the  whole  expenses,  including  the  ordinary  profits,  of 
producing  and  bringing  them  to  market. — See  chap.  x.  book  i. 


:es;   .^| 


I 
I 


Effects  of  Accumulation  on  Profits       195 

population; — wages  will  then  be  high  and  profits  low.  If  every 
man  were  to  forego  the  use  of  luxuries,  and  be  intent  only  on 
accumulation,  a  quantity  of  necessaries  might  be  produced 
for  which  there  could  not  be  any  immediate  consumption.  Of 
commodities  so  limited  in  number  there  might  undoubtedly  be 
a  universal  glut,  and  consequently  there  might  neither  be 
demand  for  an  additional  quantity  of  such  commodities  nor 
profits  on  the  employment  of  more  capital.  If  men  ceased  to 
consume,  they  would  cease  to  produce.  This  admission  does 
not  impugn  the  general  principle.  In  such  a  country  as  England, 
for  example,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  there  can  be  any 
disposition  to  devote  the  whole  capital  and  labour  of  the  country 
to  the  production  of  necessaries  only. 

When  merchants  engage  their  capitals  in  foreign  trade,  or  in 
the  carrying  trade,  it  is  always  from  choice  and  never  from 
necessity:  it  is  because  in  that  trade  their  profits  will  be  some- 
what greater  than  in  the  home  trade. 

Adam  Smith  has  justly  observed  "  that  the  desire  of  food  is 
limited  in  every  man  by  the  narrow  capacity  of  the  human 
stomach,  but  the  desire  of  the  conveniences  and  ornaments  of 
building,  dress,  equipage,  and  household  furniture  seems  to 
have  no  limit  or  certain  boundary."  Nature,  then,  has  neces- 
sarily limited  the  amount  of  capital  which  can  at  any  one  time 
be  profitably  engaged  in  agriculture,  but  she  has  placed  no 
limits  to  the  amount  of  capital  that  may  be  employed  in  pro- 
curing "  the  conveniences  and  ornaments  "  of  life.  To  procure 
these  gratifications  in  the  greatest  abundance  is  the  object  in 
view,  and  it  is  only  because  foreign  trade,  or  the  carrying  trade, 
will  accomplish  it  better,  that  men  engage  in  them  in  preference 
to  manufacturing  the  commodities  required,  or  a  substitute  for 
them,  at  home.  If,  however,  from  peculiar  circumstances,  we 
were  precluded  from  engaging  capital  in  foreign  trade,  or  in  the 
carrying  trade,  we  should,  though  with  less  advantage,  employ 
it  at  home;  and  while  there  is  no  limit  to  the  desire  of  '*  con- 
veniences, ornaments  of  building,  dress,  equipage,  and  house- 
hold furniture,"  there  can  be  no  limit  to  the  capital  that  may  be 
employed  in  procuring  them,  except  that  which  bounds  our 
power  to  maintain  the  workmen  who  are  to  produce  them. 

Adam  Smith,  however,  speaks  of  the  carrying  trade  as  one 
not  of  choice,  but  of  necessity;   as  if  the  capital  eng£ 
would  be  inert  if  not  so  employed,  as  if  the  capital  iDftl 
trade  could  overflow  if  not  confined  to  a  limited  amby^t.     He 
says,  "  when  the  capital  stock  of  any  country  is  f ^cf  ea«(l'Jtey   J  i^ 


>     ^'- 


196  Political  Economy 

such  a  degree  that  it  cannot  be  all  employed  in  supplying  the 
consumption^  and  supporting  the  productive  labour  of  thai  par- 
ticular country,  the  surplus  part  of  it  naturally  disgorges  itself 
into  the  carrying  trade,  and  is  employed  in  performing  the  same 
offices  to  other  countries." 

"  About  ninety-six  thousand  hogheads  of  tobacco  are  annually 
purchased  with  a  part  of  the  surplus  produce  of  British 
industry.  But  the  demand  of  Great  Britain  does  not  require, 
perhaps,  more  than  fourteen  thousand.  If  the  remaining 
eighty-two  thousand,  therefore,  could  not  be  sent  abroad  and 
exchanged  for  something  more  in  demand  at  home,  the  importation 
of  them  would  cease  immediately,  and  with  it  the  productive 
labour  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Great  Britain  who  are  at  present 
employed  in  preparing  the  goods  with  which  these  eighty-two 
thousand  hogsheads  are  annually  purchased^  But  could  not 
this  portion  of  the  productive  labour  of  Great  Britain  be  em- 
ployed in  preparing  some  other  sort  of  goods,  with  which  some- 
thing more  in  demand  at  home  might  be  purchased?  And  if 
it  could  not,  might  we  not  employ  this  productive  labour, 
though  with  less  advantage,  in  making  those  goods  in  demand  at 
home,  or  at  least  some  substitute  for  them?  If  we  wanted 
velvets,  might  we  not  attempt  to  make  velvets;  and  if  we 
could  not  succeed,  might  we  not  make  more  cloth,  or  some  other 
object  desirable  to  us? 

We  manufacture  commodities,  and  with  them  buy  goods 
abroad,  because  we  can  obtain  a  greater  quantity  than  we 
could  make  at  home.  Deprive  us  of  this  trade,  and  we  imme- 
diately manufacture  again  for  ourselves.  But  this  opinion  of 
Adam  Smith  is  at  variance  with  all  his  general  doctrines  on  this 
subject.  "  If  a  foreign  country  can  supply  us  with  a  commodity 
cheaper  than  we  ourselves  can  make  it,  better  buy  it  of  them 
with  some  part  of  the  produce  of  our  own  industry,  employed 
in  a  way  in  which  we  have  some  advantage.  The  general 
industry  of  the  country,  being  always  in  proportion  to  the  capital 
which  employs  it,  will  not  thereby  be  diminished,  but  only  left 
to  find  out  the  way  in  which  it  can  be  employed  with  the  greatest 
advantage." 

Again.  *'  Those,  therefore,  who  have  the  command  of  more 
food  than  they  themselves  can  consume,  are  always  willing  to 
exchange  the  surplus,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  price  of 
it,  for  gratifications  of  another  kind.  What  is  over  and  above 
satisfying  the  limited  desire  is  given  for  the  amusement  of  those 
desires  which  cannot  be  satisfied,  but  seem  to  be  altogether 


the    *l 


Effects  of  Accumulation  on  Profits      1 97 

endless.  The  poor,  in  order  to  obtain  food,  exert  themselves 
to  gratify  those  fancies  of  the  rich;  and  to  obtain  it  more 
certainly,  they  vie  with  one  another  in  the  cheapness  and 
perfection  of  their  work.  The  number  of  workmen  increases 
with  the  increasing  quantity  of  food,  or  with  the  growing 
improvement  and  cultivation  of  the  lands;  and  as  the  nature 
of  their  business  admits  of  the  utmost  subdivisions  of  laboure, 
the  quantity  of  materials  which  they  can  work  up  increases  in 
a  much  greater  proportion  than  their  numbers.  Hence  arises 
a  demand  for  every  sort  of  material  which  human  invention 
can  employ,  either  usefully  or  oinamentally,  in  building,  dress, 
equipage,  or  household  furniture;  for  the  fossils  and  minerals 
contained  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  the  precious  metals,  and 
the  precious  stones." 

It  follo^^'s,  then,  from  these  admissions,  that  there  is  no  limit 
to  demand — no  limit  to  the  employment  of  capital  while  it 
yields  any  profit,  and  that,  however  abundant  capital  may 
become,  there  is  no  other  adequate  reason  for  a  fall  of  profit 
but  a  rise  of  wages,  and  further,  it  may  be  added  that  the  only 
adequate  and  permanent  cause  for  the  rise  of  wages  is  the 
increasing  difficulty  of  providing  food  and  necessaries  for  the 
increasing  number  of  workmen. 

Adam  Smith  has  justly  observed  that  it  is  extremely  difficult 
to  determine  the  rate  of  the  profits  of  stock.  "  Profit  is  so 
fluctuating  that  even  in  a  particular  trade,  and  much  more  in 
trades  in  general,  it  would  be  difficult  to  state  the  average  rate 
of  it.  To  judge  of  what  it  may  have  been  formerly,  or  in 
remote  periods  of  time,  with  any  degree  of  precision,  must  be 
altogether  impossible."  Yet  since  it  is  evident  that  much  will 
be  given  for  the  use  of  money  when  much  can  be  made  by  it, 
he  suggests  that  "  the  market  rate  of  interest  will  lead  us  to 
form  some  notion  of  the  rate  of  profits,  and  the  history  of  the 
progress  of  interest  afford  us  that  of  the  progress  of  profits." 
Undoubtedly,  if  the  market  rate  of  interest  could  be  accurately 
known  for  any  considerable  period,  we  should  have  a  tolerably 
correct  criterion  by  which  to  estimate  the  progress  of  profits. 

But  in  all  countries,  from  mistaken  notions  of  policy,  the 
state  has  interfered  to  prevent  a  fair  and  free  market  rate  of 
interest  by  imposing  heavy  and  ruinous  penalties  on  all  those 
who  shall  take  more  than  the  rate  fixed  by  law.  In  all  countries 
probably  these  laws  are  evaded,  but  records  give  us  little  infor- 
mation on  this  head,  and  point  out  rather  the  legal  and  fixed 
rate  than  the  market  rate  of  interest.    During  the  present  war. 


198  Political  Economy 

Exchequer  and  Navy  Bills  have  been  frequently  at  so  high 
discount  as  to  afford  the  purchasers  of  them  7,  8  per  cent.,  or 
a  greater  rate  of  interest  for  their  money.  Loans  have  been 
raised  by  government  at  an  interest  exceeding  6  per  cent.,  and 
individuals  have  been  frequently  obliged,  by  indirect  means, 
to  pay  more  than  10  per  cent,  for  the  interest  of  money;  yet 
during  this  same  period  the  legal  rate  of  interest  has  been 
uniformly  at  5  per  cent.  Little  dependence  for  information, 
then,  can  be  placed  on  that  which  is  the  fixed  and  legal  rate  of 
interest,  when  we  find  it  may  differ  so  considerably  from  the 
market  rate.  Adam  Smith  informs  us  that  from  the  37th  of 
Henry  VIIL  to  21st  of  James  L,  10  per  cent,  continued  to 
be  the  legal  rate  of  interest.  Soon  after  the  restoration,  it  was 
reduced  to  6  per  cent.,  and  by  the  12th  of  Anne  to  5  per  cent. 
He  thinks  the  legal  rate  followed,  and  did  not  precede,  the  market 
rate  of  interest.  Before  the  American  war,  government  borrowed 
at  3  per  cent.,  and  the  people  of  credit  in  the  capital  and  in 
many  other  parts  of  the  kingdom  at  3^,  4,  and  4^  per  cent. 

The  rate  of  interest,  though  ultimately  and  permanently 
governed  by  the  rate  of  profit,  is,  however,  subject  to  temporary 
variations  from  other  causes.  With  every  fluctuation  in  the 
quantity  and  value  of  money,  the  prices  of  commodities  naturally 
vary.  They  vary  also,  as  we  have  already  shown,  from  the 
alteration  in  the  proportion  of  supply  to  demand,  although 
there  should  not  be  either  greater  facility  or  difficulty  of  produc- 
tion. When  the  market  prices  of  goods  fall  from  an  abundant 
supply,  from  a  diminished  demand,  or  from  a  rise  in  the  value 
of  money,  a  manufacturer  naturally  accumulates  an  unusual 
quantity  of  finished  goods,  being  unwilling  to  sell  them  at  very 
depressed  prices.  To  meet  his  ordinary  payments,  for  which 
he  used  to  depend  on  the  sale  of  his  goods,  he  now  endeavours 
to  borrow  on  credit,  and  is  often  obliged  to  give  an  increased 
rate  of  interest.  This,  however,  is  but  of  temporary  duration; 
for  either  the  manufacturer's  expectations  were  well  grounded, 
and  the  market  price  of  his  commodities  rises,  or  he  discovers 
that  there  is  a  permanently  diminished  demand,  and  he  no 
longer  resists  the  course  of  affairs:  prices  fall,  and  money  and 
interest  regain  their  real  value.  If,  by  the  discovery  of  a  new 
mine,  by  the  abuses  of  banking,  or  by  any  other  cause,  the 
quantity  of  money  be  greatly  increased,  its  ultimate  effect  is  to 
raise  the  prices  of  commodities  in  proportion  to  the  increased 
quantity  of  money;  but  there  is  probably  always  an  interval 
during  which  some  effect  is  produced  on  the  rate  of  interest. 


■ 

h  a    I 
.  or     ■ 


Effects  of  Accumulation  on  Profits       199 

The  price  of  funded  property  is  not  a  steady  criterion  by 
which  to  judge  of  the  rate  of  interest.  In  time  of  war,  the  stock 
market  is  so  loaded  by  the  continual  loans  of  government  that 
the  price  of  stock  has  not  time  to  settle  at  its  fair  level  before 
a  new  operation  of  funding  takes  place,  or  it  is  affected  by 
anticipation  of  political  events.  In  time  of  peace,  on  the 
contrary,  the  operations  of  the  sinking  fund,  the  unwillingness 
which  a  particular  class  of  persons  feel  to  divert  their  funds  to 
any  other  employment  than  that  to  which  they  have  been 
accustomed,  which  they  think  secure,  and  in  which  their  divi- 
dends are  paid  with  the  utmost  regularity,  elevates  the  price  of 
stock,  and  consequently  depresses  the  rate  of  interest  on  these 
securities  below  the  general  market  rate.  It  is  observable, 
too,  that  for  different  securities  government  pays  very  different 
rates  of  interest.  Whilst  £100  capital  in  5  per  cent,  stock  is 
selling  for  £95,  an  exchequer  bill  of  £100  will  be  sometimes 
selling  for  £100  55.,  for  which  exchequer  bill  no  more  interest 
will  be  annually  paid  than  £4  1 15.  3<f . :  one  of  these  securities 
pays  to  a  purchaser,  at  the  above  prices,  an  interest  of  more 
than  5^  per  cent.,  the  other  but  little  more  than  4I;  a  certain 
quantity  of  these  exchequer  bills  is  required  as  a  safe  and  market- 
able investment  for  bankers;  if  they  were  increased  much 
beyond  this  demand  they  would  probably  be  as  much  depre- 
ciated as  the  5  per  cent,  stock.  A  stock  paying  3  per  cent, 
per  annum  will  always  sell  at  a  proportionally  greater  price 
than  stock  paying  5  per  cent.,  for  the  capital  debt  of  neither 
can  be  discharged  but  at  par,  or  £100  money  for  £100  stock. 
The  market  rate  of  interest  may  fall  to  4  per  cent.,  and  govern- 
ment would  then  pay  the  holder  of  5  per  cent,  stock  at  par,  unless 
he  consented  to  take  4  per  cent,  on  some  diminished  rate  of 
interest  under  5  per  cent. :  they  would  have  no  advantage  from 
so  paying  the  holder  of  3  per  cent,  stock  till  the  market  rate  of 
interest  had  fallen  below  3  per  cent,  per  annum.  To  pay  the 
interest  on  the  national  debt  large  sums  of  money  are  with- 
drawn from  circulation  four  times  in  the  year  for  a  few  days. 
These  demands  for  money  being  only  temporary  seldom  affect 
prices;  they  are  generally  surmounted  by  the  payment  of  a 
large  rate  of  interest.^ 

^  "  All  kinds  of  public  loans,"  observes  M.  Say,  "  are  attended  with  the 
inconvenience  of  withdrawing  capital,  or  portions  of  capital,  from  pro- 
ductive employments,  to  devote  them  to  consumption;  and  when  they 
take  place  in  a  country,  the  government  of  which  does  not  inspire  much 
confidettce,  they  have  the  further  inconvenience  of  raising  the  interest  of 
capital.     Who  would  lend  at  5  per  cent,  per  annum  to  agriculture,  to 


200 


Political  Economy 


manufacturers,  and  to  commerce,  wheiji  a  borrower  may  be  found  ready 
pay  an  interest  of  7  or  8  per  cent.  ?  That  sort  of  income  which  is  called 
profit  of  stock  would  rise  then  at  the  expense  of  the  consumer.  Con- 
sumption would  be  reduced  by  the  rise  in  the  price  of  produce;  and  the 
other  productive  services  would  be  less  in  demand,  less  well  paid.  The 
whole  nation,  capitalists  excepted,  would  be  the  sufferers  from  such  a  state 
of  things."  To  the  question,  "  who  would  lend  money  to  farmers,  manu- 
facturers, and  merchants,  at  5  per  cent,  per  annum,  when  another  borrower, 
having  little  credit,  would  give  7  or  8  ?  "  I  reply,  that  every  prudent  and 
reasonable  man  would.  Because  the  rate  of  interest  is  7  or  8  per  cent, 
there  where  the  lender  runs  extraordinary  risk  is  this  any  reason  that  it 
should  be  equally  high  in  those  places  where  they  are  secured  from  such 
risks?  M.  Say  allows  that  the  rate  of  interest  depends  on  the  rate  of 
profits;  but  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  the  rate  of  profits  depends 
on  the  rate  of  interest.  One  is  the  cause,  the  other  the  effect,  and  it  is 
impossible  for  any  circumstances  to  make  them  change  places. 


1 


I 


CHAPTER  XXII 

BOUNTIES  ON  EXPORTATION,  AND   PROHIBITIONS  OF 
IMPORTATION 

A  BOUNTY  on  the  exportation  of  com  tends  to  lower  its  price  to 
the  foreign  consumer,  but  it  has  no  permanent  effect  on  its 
price  in  the  home  market. 

Suppose  that  to  afford  the  usual  and  general  profits  of  stock, 
the  price  of  com  should  in  England  be  £4  per  quarter;  it  could 
not  then  be  exported  to  foreign  countries  where  it  sold  for  £3  155. 
per  quarter.  But  if  a  bounty  of  10s.  per  quarter  were  given  on 
exportation,  it  could  be  sold  in  the  foreign  market  at  £3  lo^., 
and  consequently  the  same  profit  would  be  afiorded  to  the  com 
grower  whether  he  sold  it  at  £3  10^.  in  tlie  foreign  or  at  £4  in 
the  home  market. 

A  bounty  then,  which  should  lower  the  price  of  British  corn 
in  the  foreign  country  below  the  cost  of  producing  com  in  that 
country,  would  naturally  extend  the  demand  for  British  and 
diminish  the  demand  for  their  own  com.  This  extension  of 
demand  for  British  com  could  not  fail  to  raise  its  price  for  a  time 
in  the  home  market,  and  during  that  time  to  prevent  also  its 
falling  so  low  in  the  foreign  market  as  the  bounty  has  a  tendency 
to  effect.  But  the  causes  which  would  thus  operate  on  the 
market  price  of  com  in  England  would  produce  no  effect  what- 
ever on  its  natural  price,  or  its  real  cost  of  production.  To 
grow  corn  would  neither  require  more  labour  nor  more  capital, 
and,  consequently,  if  the  profits  of  the  farmer's  stock  were  before 
only  equal  to  the  profits  of  the  stock  of  other  traders,  they  will, 
after  the  rise  of  price,  be  considerably  above  them.  By  raising 
the  profits  of  the  farmer's  stock,  the  bounty  will  operate  as  an 
encouragement  to  agriculture,  and  capital  will  be  withdrawn 
from  manufactures  to  be  employed  on  the  land  till  the  enlarged 
demand  for  the  foreign  market  has  been  supplied,  when  the  price 
of  corn  will  again  fall  in  the  home  market  to  its  natural  and 
necessary  price,  and  profits  will  be  again  at  their  ordinary  and 
accustomed  level.  The  increased  supply  of  grain  operating 
on  the  foreign  market  will  also  lower  its  price  in  the  country  to 
which  it  is  exported,  and  will  thereby  restrict  the  profits  of  the 
exporter  to  the  lowest  rate  at  which  he  can  afford  to  trade. 

201 


202  Political  Economy 


The  ultimate  effect  then  of  a  bounty  on  the  exportation  of 
com  is  not  to  raise  or  to  lower  the  price  in  the  home  market,  but 
to  lower  the  price  of  corn  to  the  foreign  consumer — to  the  whole 
extent  of  the  bounty,  if  the  price  of  com  had  not  before  been 
lower  in  the  foreign  than  in  the  home  market — and  in  a  less 
degree  if  the  price  in  the  home  had  been  above  the  price  in  tlie 
foreign  market. 

A  writer  in  the  fifth  volume  of  the  Edinburgh  Review,  on  the 
subject  of  a  bounty  on  the  exportation  of  corn,  has  very  clearly 
pointed  out  its  effects  on  the  foreign  and  home  demand.  He 
has  also  justly  remarked  that  it  would  not  fail  to  give  encourage- 
ment to  agriculture  in  the  exporting  country;  but  he  appears 
to  have  imbibed  the  common  error  which  has  misled  Dr.  Smith, 
and,  I  believe,  most  other  writers  on  this  subject.  He  sup- 
poses, because  the  price  of  com  ultimately  regulates  wages, 
that  therefore  it  will  regulate  the  price  of  all  other  commodities. 
He  says  that  the  bounty,  "  by  raising  the  profits  of  farming, 
will  operate  as  an  encouragement  to  husbandry;  by  raising  the 
price  of  com  to  the  consumers  at  home  it  will  diminish  for  the 
time  their  power  of  purchasing  this  necessary  of  life,  and  thus 
abridge  their  real  wealth.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  this  last 
effect  must  be  temporary:  the  wages  of  the  labouring  consumers 
had  been  adjusted  before  by  competition,  and  the  same  principle 
will  adjust  them  again  to  the  same  rate,  by  raising  the  money 
price  of  labour,  and  through  that,  of  other  commodities,  to  the 
money  price  of  corn.  The  bounty  upon  exportation,  therefore, 
will  ultimately  raise  the  money  price  of  corn  in  the  home  market; 
not  directly,  however,  but  through  the  medium  of  an  extended 
demand  in  the  foreign  market,  and  a  consequent  enhancement 
of  the  real  price  at  home :  and  this  rise  of  the  money  price,  when 
it  has  once  been  communicated  to  other  commodities,  will  of  course 
become  fixed y 

If,  however,  I  have  succeeded  in  showing  that  it  is  not  the  rise 
in  the  money  wages  of  labour  which  raises  the  price  of  commo- 
dities, but  that  such  rise  always  affects  profits,  it  will  follow 
that  the  prices  of  commodities  would  not  rise  in  consequence 
of  a  bounty. 

But  a  temporary  rise  in  the  price  of  com,  produced  by  an 
increased  demand  from  abroad,  would  have  no  effect  on  the 
money  price  of  labour.  The  rise  of  com  is  occasioned  by  a 
competition  for  that  supply  which  was  befor-  exclusively 
appropriated  to  the  home  market.  By  raising  profits,  additional 
capital  is  employed  in  agriculture,  and  the  increased  supply  is 


I 


Bounties  and  Prohibitions  203 

obtained;  but  till  it  be  obtained,  the  high  price  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  proportion  the  consumption  to  the  supply,  which 
would  be  counteracted  by  a  rise  of  wages.  The  rise  of  com  is 
the  consequence  of  its  scarcity,  and  is  the  means  by  which  the 
demand  of  the  home  purchasers  is  diminished.  If  wages  were 
increased,  the  competition  would  increase,  and  a  further  rise 
of  the  price  of  corn  would  become  necessary.  In  this  account 
of  the  effects  of  a  bounty  nothing  has  been  supposed  to  occur 
to  raise  the  natural  price  of  corn,  by  which  its  market  price  is 
ultimately  governed;  for  it  has  not  been  supposed  that  any 
additional  labour  would  be  required  on  the  land  to  insure  a  given 
production,  and  this  alone  can  raise  its  natural  price.  If  the 
natural  price  of  cloth  were  20s.  per  yard,  a  great  increase  in  the 
foreign  demand  might  raise  the  price  to  255-.,  or  more,  but  the 
profits  which  would  then  be  made  by  the  clothier  would  not  fail 
to  attract  capital  in  that  direction,  and  although  the  demand 
should  be  doubled,  trebled,  or  quadrupled,  the  supply  would 
ultimately  be  obtained,  and  cloth  would  fall  to  its  natural  price 
of  20^.  So,  in  the  supply  of  com,  although  we  should  export 
200,000,  300,000,  or  800,000  quarters  annually,  it  would  ulti- 
mately be  produced  at  its  natural  price,  which  never  varies, 
unless  a  different  quantity  of  labour  becomes  necessary  to 
production. 

Perhaps  in  no  part  of  Adam  Smith's  justly  celebrated  work 
are  his  conclusions  more  liable  to  objection  than  in  the  chapter 
on  bounties.  In  the  first  place,  he  speaks  of  corn  as  of  a  com- 
modity of  which  the  production  cannot  be  increased  in  conse- 
quence of  a  bounty  on  exportation;  he  supposes  invariably 
that  it  acts  only  on  the  quantity  actually  produced,  and  is  no 
stimulus  to  farther  production.  "  In  years  of  plenty,"  he  says, 
"  by  occasioning  an  extraordinary  exportation,  it  necessarily 
keeps  up  the  price  of  corn  in  the  home  market  above  what  it 
would  naturally  fall  to.  In  years  of  scarcity,  though  the  bounty 
is  frequently  suspended,  yet  the  great  exportation  which  it 
occasions  in  years  of  plenty  must  frequently  hinder,  more  or 
less,  the  plenty  of  one  year  from  relieving  the  scarcity  of  another. 
Both  in  the  years  of  plenty  and  in  years  of  scarcity,  therefore, 
the  bounty  necessarily  tends  to  raise  the  money  price  of  com 
somewhat  higher  than  it  otherwise  would  be  in  the  home 
market."  ^ 

^  In  another  place  he  says,  that  "  whatever  extension  of  the  foreign 
market  can  be  occasioned  by  the  bounty  must,  in  every  particular  year,  be 
altogether  at  the  expense  of  the  home  market,  as  every  bushel  of  com  which 


1 

t  the 


204  Political  Economy 

Adam  Smith  appears  to  have  been  fully  aware  that 
correctness  of  his  argument  entirely  depended  on  the  fact 
whether  the  increase  "  of  the  money  price  of  com,  by  rendering 
that  commodity  more  profitable  to  the  farmer,  would  not 
necessarily  encourage  its  production." 

"  I  answer,"  he  says,  "  that  this  might  be  the  case  if  the  effect 
of  the  bounty  was  to  raise  the  real  price  of  com,  or  to  enable  the 
farmer,  with  an  equal  quantity  of  it,  to  maintain  a  greater 
number  of  labourers  in  the  same  manner,  whether  liberal, 
moderate,  or  scanty,  as  other  labourers  are  commonly  main- 
tained in  his  neighbourhood." 

If  nothing  were  consumed  by  the  labourer  but  corn,  and  if  the 
portion  which  he  received  was  the  very  lowest  which  his  sus- 
tenance required,  there  might  be  some  ground  for  supposing 
that  the  quantity  paid  to  the  labourer  could,  under  no  circum- 
stances, be  reduced — but  the  money  wages  of  labour  some- 
times do  not  rise  at  all,  and  never  rise  in  proportion  to  the  rise 
in  the  money  price  of  corn,  because  corn,  though  an  important 
part,  is  only  a  part  of  the  consumption  of  the  labourer.  If  half 
his  wages  were  expended  on  com,  and  the  other  half  on  soap, 
candles,  fuel,  tea,  sugar,  clothing,  etc.,  commodities  on  which 
no  rise  is  supposed  to  take  place,  it  is  evident  that  he  would  be 
quite  as  well  paid  with  a  bushel  and  a  half  of  wheat  when  it 
was  165.  a  bushel,  as  he  was  with  two  bushels  when  the  price 
was  8^.  per  bushel;  or  with  245.  in  money  as  he  was  before  with 
165.  His  wages  would  rise  only  50  per  cent,  though  com  rose 
100  per  cent.;  and,  consequently,  there  would  be  sufficient 
motive  to  divert  more  capital  to  the  land  if  profits  on  other 

is  exported  by  means  of  the  bounty,  and  which  would  not  have  been 
exported  without  the  bounty,  would  have  remained  in  the  home  market 
to  increase  the  consumption  and  to  lower  the  price  of  that  commodity. 
The  corn  bounty,  it  is  to  be  observed,  as  well  as  every  other  bounty  upon 
exportation,  imposes  two  different  taxes  upon  the  people: — first,  the  tax 
which  they  are  obliged  to  contribute  in  order  to  pay  the  bounty;  and, 
secondly,  the  tax  which  arises  from  the  advanced  price  of  the  commodity 
in  the  home  market,  and  which,  as  the  whole  body  of  the  people  are 
purchasers  of  corn,  must,  in  this  particular  commodity,  be  paid  by  the 
whole  body  of  the  people.  In  this  particular  commodity,  therefore,  this 
second  tax  is  by  much  the  heaviest  of  the  two."  "  For  every  five  shillings, 
therefore,  which  they  contribute  to  the  payment  of  the  first  tax,  they  must 
contribute  six  pounds  four  shillings  to  the  payment  of  the  second."  "  The 
extraordinary  exportation  of  corn,  therefore,  occasioned  by  the  bounty, 
not  only  in  every  particular  year  diminishes  the  home  just  as  much  as  it 
extends  the  foreign  market  and  consumption;  but,  by  restraining  the 
population  and  industry  of  the  country,  its  final  tendency  is  to  stunt  and 
restrain  the  gradual  extension  of  the  home  market,  and  thereby,  in  the 
long  run,  rather  to  diminish  than  to  augment  the  whole  market  and 
consumption  of  corn." 


1 


Bounties  and  Prohibitions  205 

trades  continued  the  same  as  before.  But  such  a  rise  of  wages 
would  also  induce  manufacturers  to  withdraw  their  capitals 
from  manufactures  to  employ  them  on  the  land ;  for,  whilst  the 
farmer  increased  the  price  of  his  commodity  100  per  cent,  and 
his  wages  only  50  per  cent.,  the  manufacturer  would  be  obliged 
also  to  raise  wages  50  per  cent.,  whilst  he  had  no  compensation 
whatever  in  the  rise  of  his  manufactured  commodity  for  this 
increased  charge  of  production;  capital  would  consequently 
flow  from  manufactures  to  agriculture,  till  the  supply  would 
again  lower  the  price  of  corn  to  8s.  per  bushel  and  wages  to 
165.  per  week;  when  the  manufacturer  would  obtain  the  same 
profits  as  the  farmer,  and  the  tide  of  capital  would  cease  to  set 
in  either  direction.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  mode  in  which  the 
cultivation  of  com  is  always  extended,  and  the  increased  wants 
of  the  market  supplied.  The  funds  for  the  maintenance  of 
labour  increase,  and  wages  are  raised.  The  comfortable  situation 
of  the  labourer  induces  him  to  marry — population  increases,  and 
the  demand  for  com  raises  its  price  relatively  to  other  things — 
more  capital  is  profitably  employed  on  agriculture,  and  continues 
to  flow  towards  it,  till  the  supply  is  equal  to  the  demand,  when 
the  price  again  falls,  and  agricultural  and  manufacturing  profits 
are  again  brought  to  a  level. 

But  whether  wages  were  stationary  after  the  rise  in  the  price 
of  com,  or  advanced  moderately  or  enormously,  is  of  no  import- 
ance to  this  question,  for  wages  are  paid  by  the  manufacturer 
a$  well  as  by  the  farmer,  and,  therefore,  in  this  respect  they 
must  be  equally  affected  by  a  rise  in  the  price  of  corn.  But 
they  are  unequally  affected  in  their  profits,  inasmuch  as  the 
farmer  sells  his  commodity  at  an  advanced  price,  while  the 
manufacturer  sells  his  for  the  same  price  as  before.  It  is,  how- 
ever, the  inequality  of  profit  which  is  always  the  inducement 
to  remove  capital  from  one  employment  to  another;  and, 
therefore,  more  corn  would  be  produced,  and  fewer  commodities 
manufactured.  Manufactures  would  not  rise,  because  fewer 
would  be  manufactured,  for  a  supply  of  them  would  be  obtained 
in  exchange  for  the  exported  corn. 

A  bounty,  if  it  raises  the  price  of  com,  either  raises  it  in  com- 
parison with  the  price  of  other  commodities  or  it  does  not.  If 
the  affirmative  be  tme,  it  is  impossible  to  deny  the  greater 
profits  of  the  farmer,  and  the  temptation  to  the  removal  of 
capital  till  its  price  is  again  lowered  by  an  abundant  supply. 
If  it  does  not  raise  it  in  comparison  with  other  commodities, 
where  is  the  injury  to  the  home  consumer  beyond  the  incon- 


■ 


2o6  Political  Economy 

venience  of  paying  the  tax?  If  the  manufacturer  pays  a  gn 
price  for  his  corn,  he  is  compensated  by  the  greater  price  at 
which  he  sells  his  commodity,  with  which  his  com  is  ultimately 
purchased. 

The  error  of  Adam  Smith  proceeds  precisely  from  the  same 
source  as  that  of  the  writer  in  the  Edinburgh  Review  ;  for  they 
both  think  '*  that  the  money  price  of  corn  regulates  that  of  all 
other  home-made  commodities."  ^  *'  It  regulates,"  says  Adam 
Smith,  **  the  money  price  of  labour,  which  must  always  be  such 
as  to  enable  the  labourer  to  purchase  a  quantity  of  com  sufficient 
to  maintain  him  and  his  family,  either  in  the  liberal,  moderate, 
or  scanty  manner,  in  which  the  advancing,  stationary,  or 
declining  circumstances  of  the  society  oblige  his  employers  to 
maintain  him.  By  regulating  the  money  price  of  all  the  other 
parts  of  the  mde  produce  of  land,  it  regulates  that  of  the 
materials  of  almost  all  manufactures.  By  regulating  the  money 
price  of  labour,  it  regulates  that  of  manufacturing  art  and 
industry;  and  by  regulating  both,  it  regulates  that  of  the 
complete  manufacture.  The  money  price  of  labour,  and  of 
everything  that  is  the  produce  either  of  land  or  labour,  must  neces- 
sarily rise  or  fail  in  proportion  to  the  money  price  of  corn^ 

This  opinion  of  Adam  Smith  I  have  before  attempted  to 
refute.  In  considering  a  rise  in  the  price  of  commodities  as  a 
necessary  consequence  of  a  rise  in  the  price  of  com,  he  reasons 
as  though  there  were  no  other  fund  from  which  the  increased 
charge  could  be  paid.  He  has  wholly  neglected  the  considera- 
tion of  profits,  the  diminution  of  which  forms  that  fund,  without 
raising  the  price  of  commodities.  If  this  opinion  of  Dr.  Smith 
were  well  founded,  profits  could  never  really  fall,  whatever 
accumulation  of  capital  there  might  be.  If,  when  wages  rose, 
the  farmer  could  raise  the  price  of  his  com,  and  the  clothier,  the 
hatter,  the  shoemaker,  and  every  other  manufacturer  could  also 
raise  the  price  of  their  goods  in  proportion  to  the  advance, 
although  estimated  in  money  they  might  be  all  raised,  they 
would  continue  to  bear  the  same  value  relatively  to  each  other. 
Each  of  these  trades  could  command  the  same  quantity  as  before 
of  the  goods  of  the  others,  which,  since  it  is  goods,  and  not 
money,  which  constitute  wealth,  is  the  only  circumstance  that 
could  be  of  importance  to  them ;  and  the  whole  rise  in  the  price 
of  raw  produce  and  of  goods  would  be  injurious  to  no  other 
persons  but  to  those  whose  property  consisted  of  gold  and  silver, 
or  whose  annual  income  was  paid  in  a  contributed  quantity 
*  The  same  opinion  is  held  by  M.  Say. — Vol.  ii.  p.  335. 


I 


Bounties  and  Prohibitions  207 

of  those  metals,  whether  in  the  form  of  bullion  or  of  money. 
Suppose  the  use  of  money  to  be  wholly  laid  aside,  and  all  trade 
to  be  carried  on  by  barter.  Under  such  circumstances,  could 
corn  rise  in  exchangeable  value  with  other  things  ?  If  it  could, 
then  it  is  not  true  that  the  value  of  com  regulates  the  value  of 
all  other  commodities;  for  to  do  that,  it  should  not  vary  in 
relative  value  to  them.  If  it  could  not,  then  it  must  be  main- 
tained that  whether  corn  be  obtained  on  rich  or  on  poor  land, 
with  much  labour  or  with  little,  with  the  aid  of  machinery  or 
without,  it  would  always  exchange  for  an  equal  quantity  of  all 
other  commodities. 

I  cannot,  however,  but  remark  that  though  Adam  Smith's 
general  doctrines  correspond  with  this  which  I  have  just  quoted, 
yet  in  one  part  of  his  work  he  appears  to  have  given  a  correct 
account  of  the  nature  of  value.  "  The  proportion  between  the 
value  of  gold  and  silver,  and  that  of  goods  of  any  other  kind, 
DEPENDS  IN  ALL  CASES,"  he  says,  "  upon  the  proportion  between 
the  quantity  of  labour  which  is  necessary  in  order  to  bring  a  certain 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver  to  market,  and  that  which  is  necessary 
to  bring  thither  a  certain  quantity  of  any  other  sort  of  goods'' 
Does  he  not  here  fully  acknowledge,  that  if  any  increase  takes 
place  in  the  quantity  of  labour  required  to  bring  one  sort  of 
goods  to  market,  whilst  no  such  increase  takes  place  in  bringing 
another  sort  thither,  the  first  sort  will  rise  in  relative  value? 
If  no  more  labour  than  before  be  required  to  bring  either  cloth 
or  gold  to  market,  they  will  not  vary  in  relative  value,  but  if 
more  labour  be  required  to  bring  corn  and  shoes  to  market,  will 
not  com  and  shoes  rise  in  value  relatively  to  cloth  and  money 
made  of  gold  ? 

Adam  Smith  again  considers  that  the  effect  of  the  bounty  is  to 
cause  a  partial  degradation  in  the  value  of  money.  "  That 
degradation,"  says  he,  "  in  the  value  of  silver  which  is  the 
effect  of  the  fertility  of  the  mines,  and  which  operates  equally, 
or  very  nearly  equally,  through  the  greater  part  of  the  com- 
mercial world,  is  a  matter  of  very  little  consequence  to  any 
particular  country.  The  consequent  rise  of  all  money  prices, 
though  it  does  not  make  those  who  receive  them  really  richer, 
does  not  make  them  really  poorer.  A  service  of  plate  becomes 
really  cheaper,  and  everything  else  remains  precisely  of  the 
same  real  value  as  before."    This  observation  is  most  correct. 

*'  But  that  degradation  in  the  value  of  silver,  which,  being  the 
effect  either  of  the  peculiar  situation  or  of  the  political  institu- 
tions of  a  particular  country,  takes  place  only  in  that  countr)^,. 


2o8  Political  Economy 

is  a  matter  of  very  great  consequence,  which,  far  from  tending 
to  make  anybody  really  richer,  tends  to  make  everybody  really 
poorer.  The  rise  in  the  money  price  of  all  commodities,  which 
is  in  this  case  peculiar  to  that  country,  tends  to  discourage  more 
or  less  every  sort  of  industry  which  is  carried  on  within  it,  and 
to  enable  foreign  nations,  by  furnishing  almost  all  sorts  of  goods 
for  a  smaller  quantity  of  silver  than  its  own  workmen  can  afford 
to  do,  to  undersell  them,  not  only  in  the  foreign,  but  even  in  the 
home  market." 

I  have  elsewhere  attempted  to  show  that  a  partial  degradation 
in  the  value  of  money,  which  shall  affect  both  agricultural 
produce  and  manufactured  commodities,  cannot  possibly  be 
permanent.  To  say  that  money  is  partially  degraded,  in  this 
sense,  is  to  say  that  all  commodities  are  at  a  high  price;  but 
while  gold  and  silver  are  at  liberty  to  make  purchases  in  the 
cheapest  market,  they  will  be  exported  for  the  cheaper  goods 
of  other  countries,  and  the  reduction  of  their  quantity  will 
increase  their  value  at  home;  commodities  will  regain  their 
usual  level,  and  those  fitted  for  foreign  markets  will  be  exported 
as  before. 

A  bounty,  therefore,  cannot,  I  think,  be  objected  to  on  this 
ground. 

If,  then,  a  bounty  raises  the  price  of  com  in  comparison  with 
all  other  things,  the  farmer  will  be  benefited,  and  more  land 
will  be  cultivated;  but  if  the  bounty  do  not  raise  the  value  of 
com  relatively  to  other  things  then  no  other  inconvenience 
will  attend  it  than  that  of  paying  the  bounty;  one  which 
neither  wish  to  conceal  nor  underrate. 

Dr.  Smith  states  that  "  by  establishing  high  duties  on  th( 
importation,  and  bounties  on  the  exportation  of  com,  thi 
country  gentlemen  seemed  to  have  imitated  the  conduct  of  th 
manufacturers."  By  the  same  means,  both  had  endeavoured  to 
raise  the  value  of  their  commodities.  "  They  did  not,  perhaps, 
attend  to  the  great  and  essential  difference  which  nature  has 
established  between  com  and  almost  every  other  sort  of  goods. 
When  by  either  of  the  above  means  you  enable  our  manufac- 
turers to  sell  their  goods  for  somewhat  a  better  price  than  they 
otherwise  could  get  for  them,  you  raise  not  only  the  nominal, 
but  the  real  price  of  those  goods.  You  increase  not  only  the 
nominal,  but  the  real  profit,  the  real  wealth  and  revenue  of  those 
manufacturers  —  you  really  encourage  those  manufacturers. 
But  when,  by  the  like  institutions,  you  raise  the  nominal  or 
money  price  of  com,  you  do  not  raise  its  real  value,  you  do  not 


e 


1 


Bounties  and  Prohibitions  209 

increase  the  real  wealth  of  our  farmers  or  country  gentlemen, 
you  do  not  encourage  the  growth  of  corn.  The  nature  of  things 
has  stamped  upon  corn  a  real  value  which  cannot  be  altered  by 
merely  altering  its  money  price.  Through  the  world  in  general 
that  value  is  equal  to  the  quantity  of  labour  which  it  can 
maintain." 

I  have  already  attempted  to  show  that  the  market  price  of 
com  would,  under  an  increased  demand  from  the  effects  of  a 
bounty,  exceed  its  natural  price,  till  the  requisite  additional 
supply  was  obtained,  and  that  then  it  would  again  fall  to  its 
natural  price.  But  the  natural  price  of  com  is  not  so  fixed  as 
the  natural  price  of  commodities;  because,  with  any  great 
additional  demand  for  corn,  land  of  a  worse  quality  must  be 
taken  into  cultivation,  on  which  more  labour  will  be  required 
to  produce  a  given  quantity,  and  the  natural  price  of  corn  will 
be  raised.  By  a  continued  bounty,  therefore,  on  the  exporta- 
tion of  corn,  there  would  be  created  a  tendency  to  a  permanent 
rise  in  the  price  of  corn,  and  this,  as  I  have  shown  elsewhere,^ 
never  fails  to  raise  rent.  Country  gentlemen,  then,  have  not 
only  a  temporary  but  a  permanent  interest  in  prohibitions  of  the 
importation  of  corn,  and  in  bounties  on  its  exportation;  but 
manufacturers  have  no  permanent  interest  in  establishing  high 
duties  on  the  importation,  and  bounties  on  the  exportation  of 
commodities ;  their  interest  is  wholly  temporary. 

A  bounty  on  the  exportation  of  manufactures  will,  un- 
doubtedly, as  Dr.  Smith  contends,  raise  for  a  time  the  market 
price  of  manufactures,  but  it  will  not  raise  their  natural  price. 
The  labour  of  200  men  will  produce  double  the  quantity  of  these 
goods  that  100  could  produce  before;  and,  consequently,  when 
the  requisite  quantity  of  capital  was  employed  in  supplying  the 
requisite  quantity  of  manufactures,  they  would  again  fall  to 
their  natural  price,  and  all  advantage  from  a  high  market  price 
would  cease.  It  is,  then,  only  during  the  interval  after  the  rise 
in  the  market  price  of  commodities,  and  till  the  additional 
supply  is  obtained,  that  the  manufacturers  will  enjoy  high 
profits;  for  as  soon  as  prices  had  subsided,  their  profits  would 
sink  to  the  general  level. 

Instead  of  agreeing,  therefore,  with  Adam  Smith,  that  the 
country  gentlemen  had  not  so  great  an  interest  in  prohibiting 
the  importation  of  corn,  as  the  manufacturer  had  in  prohibiting 
the  importation  of  manufactured  goods,  I  contend,  that  they 
have  a  much  superior  interest;  for  their  advantage  is  permanent,  * 
*  See  chapter  on  Rent. 

O 


2IO  Political  Economy 

while  that  of  the  manufacturer  is  only  temporary.  Dr.  Smith 
observes  that  nature  has  estabhshed  a  great  and  essential 
difference  between  com  and  other  goods,  but  the  proper  inference 
from  that  circumstance  is  directly  the  reverse  of  that  which  he 
draws  from  it;  for  it  is  on  account  of  this  difference  that  rent 
is  created,  and  that  country  gentlemen  have  an  interest  in  the 
rise  of  the  natural  price  of  com.  Instead  of  comparing  the 
interest  of  the  manufacturer  with  the  interest  of  the  country 
gentleman,  Dr.  Smith  should  have  compared  it  with  the  interest 
of  the  farmer,  which  is  very  distinct  from  that  of  his  landlord. 
Manufacturers  have  no  interest  in  the  rise  of  the  natural  price 
of  their  commodities,  nor  have  farmers  any  interest  in  the  rise 
of  the  natural  price  of  com,  or  other  raw  produce,  though  both 
these  classes  are  benefited  while  the  market  price  of  their  pro- 
ductions exceeds  their  natural  price.  On  the  contrary,  land- 
lords have  a  most  decided  interest  in  the  rise  of  the  natural  price 
of  corn ;  for  the  rise  of  rent  is  the  inevitable  consequence  of  the 
difficulty  of  producing  raw  produce,  without  which  its  natural 
price  could  not  rise.  Now,  as  bounties  on  exportation  and 
prohibitions  of  the  importation  of  com  increase  the  demand,  and 
drive  us  to  the  cultivation  of  poorer  lands,  they  necessarily 
occasion  an  increased  difficulty  of  production.  MM 

The  sole  effect  of  high  duties  on  the  importation,  either  or|l 
manufactures  or  of  corn,  or  of  a  bounty  on  their  exportation, 
is  to  divert  a  portion  of  capital  to  an  employment  which  it 
would  not  naturally  seek.  It  causes  a  pernicious  distribution 
of  the  general  funds  of  the  society — it  bribes  a  manufacturer 
to  commence  or  continue  in  a  comparatively  less  profitable 
employment.  It  is  the  worst  species  of  taxation,  for  it  docs  not 
give  to  the  foreign  country  all  that  it  takes  away  from  the  home 
country,  the  balance  of  loss  being  made  up  by  the  less  advan- 
tageous distribution  of  the  general  capital.  Thus,  if  the  price 
of  corn  is  in  England  £4,  and  in  France  £3  155.,  a  bounty  of  105. 
will  ultimately  reduce  it  to  £3  los.  in  France,  and  maintain  it  at 
the  same  price  of  £4.  in  England.  For  every  quarter  exported, 
England  pays  a  tax  of  105.  For  every  quarter  imported  into 
France,  France  gains  only  55.,  so  that  the  value  of  55.  per 
quarter  is  absolutely  lost  to  the  world  by  such  a  distribution 
of  its  funds,  as  to  cause  diminished  production,  probably  not  of 
corn,  but  of  some  other  object  of  necessity  or  enjoyment. 

Mr.  Buchanan  appears  to  have  seen  the  fallacy  of  Dr.  Smith's 
arguments  respecting  bounties,  and  on  the  last  passage  which  I 
have  quoted  very  judiciously  remarks:      "In  asserting  that 


I 


Bounties  and  Prohibitions  2 1 1 

nature  has  stamped  a  real  value  on  corn,  which  cannot  be  altered 
by  merely  altering  its  money  price,  Dr.  Smith  confounds  its 
value  in  use  with  its  value  in  exchange.  A  bushel  of  wheat  will 
not  feed  more  people  during  scarcity  than  during  plenty;  but 
a  bushel  of  wheat  will  exchange  for  a  greater  quantity  of  luxuries 
and  conveniences  when  it  is  scarce  than  when  it  is  abundant; 
and  the  landed  proprietors,  who  have  a  surplus  of  food  to  dis- 
pose of,  will  therefore,  in  times  of  scarcity,  be  richer  men;  they 
will  exchange  their  surplus  for  a  greater  value  of  other  enjoy- 
ments than  when  corn  is  in  greater  plenty.  It  is  vain  to  argue, 
therefore,  that  if  the  bounty  occasions  a  forced  exportation  of 
com,  it  will  not  also  occasion  a  real  rise  of  price."  The  whole 
of  Mr.  Buchanan's  arguments  on  this  part  of  the  subject  of 
bounties  appear  to  me  to  be  perfectly  clear  and  satisfactory. 

Mr.  Buchanan,  however,  has  not,  I  think,  any  more  than  Dr. 
Smith  or  the  writer  in  the  Edinburgh  Review,  correct  opinions 
as  to  the  influence  of  a  rise  in  the  price  of  labour  on  manufactured 
commodities.  From  his  peculiar  views,  which  I  have  elsewhere 
noticed,  he  thinks  that  the  price  of  labour  has  no  connection 
with  the  price  of  com,  and,  therefore,  that  the  real  value  of  com 
might  and  would  rise  without  affecting  the  price  of  labour;  but 
if  labour  were  affected,  he  would  maintain  with  Adam  Smith 
and  the  writer  in  the  Edinburgh  Revieiv  that  the  price  of  manu- 
factured commodities  would  also  rise;  and  then  I  do  not  see 
how  he  would  distinguish  such  a  rise  of  corn  from  a  fall  in  the 
value  of  money,  or  how  he  could  come  to  any  other  conclusion 
than  that  of  Dr.  Smith.  In  a  note  to  page  276,  vol.  i.  of  the 
Wealth  of  Nations,  Mr.  Buchanan  observes,  "  but  the  price  of 
com  does  not  regulate  the  money  price  of  all  the  other  parts 
of  the  rude  produce  of  land.  It  regulates  the  price  of  neither 
metals,  nor  of  various  other  useful  substances,  such  as  coals, 
wood,  stones,  etc.;  and  as  it  does  not  regulate  the  price  of  labour, 
it  does  not  regulate  the  price  of  manufactures  ;  so  that  the  bounty, 
in  so  far  as  it  raises  the  price  of  com,  is  undoubtedly  a  real  benefit 
to  the  farmer.  It  is  not  on  this  ground,  therefore,  that  its  policy 
must  be  argued.  Its  encouragement  to  agriculture,  by  raising 
the  price  of  com,  must  be  admitted;  and  the  question  then 
comes  to  be  whether  agriculture  ought  to  be  thus  encouraged.'*  " 
— It  is  then,  according  to  Mr.  Buchanan,  a  real  benefit  to  the 
farmer,  because  it  does  not  raise  the  price  of  labour;  but  if  it 
did,  it  would  raise  the  price  of  all  things  in  proportion,  and  then 
it  would  afford  no  particular  encouragement  to  agriculture. 

It  must,  however,  be  conceded  that  the  tendency  of  a  bounty 


m  a  sm^ 


212  Political  Economy 

on  the  exportation  of  any  commodity  is  to  lower  in 
degree  the  value  of  money.  Whatever  facilitates  exportation 
tends  to  accumulate  money  in  a  country;  and,  on  the  contrary, 
whatever  impedes  exportation  tends  to  diminish  it.  The 
general  effect  of  taxation,  by  raising  the  prices  of  the  commo- 
dities taxed,  tends  to  diminish  exportation,  and,  therefore,  to 
check  the  influx  of  money ;  and,  on  the  same  principle,  a  bounty 
encourages  the  influx  of  money.  This  is  more  fully  explained 
in  the  general  observations  on  taxation. 

The  injurious  effects  of  the  mercantile  system  have  been  fully 
exposed  by  Dr.  Smith;  the  whole  aim  of  that  system  was  to 
raise  the  price  of  commodities  in  the  home  market  by  prohibiting 
foreign  competition;  but  this  system  was  no  more  injurious  to 
the  agricultural  classes  than  to  any  other  part  of  the  community. 
By  forcing  capital  into  channels  where  it  would  not  otherwise 
flow,  it  diminished  the  whole  amount  of  commodities  produced. 
The  price,  though  permanently  higher,  was  not  sustained  by 
scarcity,  but  by  difficulty  of  production ;  and  therefore,  though 
the  sellers  of  such  commodities  sold  them  for  a  higher  price,  they 
did  not  sell  them,  after  the  requisite  quantity  of  capital  was 
employed  in  producing  them,  at  higher  profits.^ 

The  manufacturers  themselves,  as  consumers,  had  to  pay  an 
additional  price  for  such  commodities,  and,  therefore,  it  cannot 
be  correctly  said  that  "  the  enhancement  of  price  occasioned 
by  both  (corporation  laws  and  high  duties  on  the  importations 
of  foreign  commodities)  is  everywhere  finally  paid  by  the  land- 
lords, farmers,  and  labourers  of  the  country." 

It  is  the  more  necessary  to  make  this  remark  as  in  the  present 
day  the  authority  of  Adam  Smith  is  quoted  by  country  gentle- 
men for  imposing  similar  high  duties  on  the  importation  of 
foreign  corn.     Because  the  cost  of  production,  and,  therefore, 

*  M.  Say  supposes  the  advantage  of  the  manufacturers  at  home  to  be 
more  than  temporary.  "  A  government  which  absolutely  prohibits  the 
importation  of  certain  foreign  goods  establishes  a  monopoly  in  favour  of 
those  who  produce  such  commodities  at  home  against  those  who  consume 
them;  in  other  words,  those  at  home  who  produce  them  having  the 
exclusive  privilege  of  selling  them,  may  elevate  their  price  above  the 
natural  price;  and  the  consumers  at  home,  not  being  able  to  obtain  them 
elsewhere,  are  obliged  to  purchase  them  at  a  higher  price." — Vol.  i.  p.  201. 
But  how  can  they  permanently  support  the  market  price  of  their  goods 
above  the  natural  price,  when  every  one  of  their  fellow  citizens  is  free  to 
enter  into  the  trade?  They  are  guaranteed  against  foreign,  but  not 
against  home  competition.  The  real  evil  arising  to  the  country  from  such 
monopolies,  if  they  can  be  called  by  that  name,  lies  not  in  raising  the 
market  price  of  such  goods,  but  in  raising  their  real  and  natural  price.  By 
increasing  the  cost  of  production,  a  portion  of  the  labour  of  the  country  is 
less  productively  employed. 


I 


Bounties  and  Prohibitions  2 1 3 

the  prices  of  various  manufactured  commodities,  are  raised  to 
the  consumer  by  one  error  in  legislation,  the  country  has  been 
called  upon,  on  the  plea  of  justice,  quietly  to  submit  to  fresh 
exactions.  Because  we  all  pay  an  additional  price  for  our 
linen,  muslin,  and  cottons,  it  is  thought  just  that  we  should 
pay  also  an  additional  price  for  our  com.  Because,  in  the 
general  distribution  of  the  labour  of  the  world,  we  have  pre- 
vented the  greatest  amount  of  productions  from  bei  ^  obtained 
by  our  portion  of  that  labour  in  manufactured  commodities,  we 
should  further  punish  ourselves  by  diminishing  the  productive 
powers  of  the  general  labour  in  the  supply  of  raw  produce.  It 
would  be  much  wiser  to  acknowledge  the  errors  which  a  mistaken 
policy  has  induced  us  to  adopt,  and  immediately  to  commence 
a  gradual  recurrence  to  the  sound  principles  of  a  universally 
free  trade. ^ 

*'  I  have  already  had  occasion  to  remark,"  observes  M.  Say, 
"  in  speaking  of  what  is  improperly  called  the  balance  of  trade, 
that  if  it  suits  a  merchant  better  to  export  the  precious  metals 
to  a  foreign  country  than  any  other  goods,  it  is  also  the  interest 
of  the  state  that  he  should  export  them,  because  the  state  only 
gains  or  loses  through  the  channel  of  its  citizens;  and  in  what 
concerns  foreign  trade,  that  which  best  suits  the  individual 
best  suits  also  the  state;  therefore,  by  opposing  obstacles  to 
the  exportation  which  individuals  would  be  inclined  to  make 
of  tlie  precious  metals,  nothing  more  is  done  than  to  force  them 
to  substitute  some  other  commodity  less  profitable  to  them- 
selves and  to  the  state.  It  must,  however,  be  remarked  that 
I  say  only  in  what  concerns  foreign  trade ;  because  the  profits 
which  merchants  make  by  their  dealings  with  their  countrymen, 
as  well  as  those  which  are  made  in  the  exclusive  commerce  with 
colonies,  are  not  entirely  gains  for  the  state.  In  the  trade 
between  individuals  of  the  same  country  there  is  no  other  gain 
but  the  value  of  a  utility  produced;  que  la  valeur  d'une  utilite 
produite,''  ^  vol.  i.  p.  401.     I  cannot  see  the  distinction  here 

^  "  A  freedom  of  trade  is  alone  wanted  to  guarantee  a  country  like 
Britain,  abounding  in  all  the  varied  products  of  industry,  in  merchandise 
suited  to  the  wants  of  every  society,  from  the  possibility  of  a  scarcity. 
The  nations  of  the  earth  are  not  condemned  to  throw  the  dice  to  determine 
which  of  them  shall  submit  to  famine.  There  is  always  abundance  of  food 
in  the  world.  To  enjoy  a  constant  plenty  we  have  only  to  lay  aside  our 
prohibitions  and  restrictions,  and  cease  to  counteract  the  benevolent 
>visdora  of  Providence." — Article  "  Com  Laws  and  Trade,"  Supplement  to 
Encyclopo'Ma  Britannica. 

*  Are  not  the  following  passages  contradictory  to  the  one  above  quoted  ? 
"  Besides,  that  home  trade,  though  less  noticed  (because  it  is  in  a  variety 
of  hands),  is  the  most  considerable,  it  is  also  the  most  profitable.     The 


214  Political  Economy 


^^ 


made  between  the  profits  of  the  home  and  foreign  trade, 
object  of  all  trade  is  to  increase  productions.  If,  for  the  pur- 
chase of  a  pipe  of  wine,  I  had  it  in  my  power  to  export  bullion 
which  was  bought  with  the  value  of  the  produce  of  loo  days' 
labour,  but  government,  by  prohibiting  the  exportation  of 
bullion,  should  oblige  me  to  purchase  my  wine  with  a  commodity 
bought  with  the  value  of  the  produce  of  105  days'  labour,  the 
produce  of  five  days'  labour  is  lost  to  me,  and,  through  me,  to 
the  state.  But  if  these  transactions  took  place  between  indivi- 
duals in  different  provinces  of  the  same  country,  the  same 
advantage  would  accrue  both  to  the  individual,  and,  through 
him,  to  the  country,  if  he  were  unfettered  in  his  choice  of  the 
commodities  with  which  he  made  his  purchases,  and  the  same 
disadvantage  if  he  were  obliged  by  government  to  purchase 
with  the  least  beneficial  commodity.  If  a  manufacturer  could 
work  up  with  the  same  capital  more  iron  where  coals  are  plentiful 
than  he  could  where  coals  are  scarce,  the  country  would  be 
benefited  by  the  difference.  But  if  coals  were  nowhere  plentiful, 
and  he  imported  iron,  and  could  get  this  additional  quantity 
by  the  manufacture  of  a  commodity  with  the  same  capital  and 
labour,  he  would,  in  like  manner,  benefit  his  country  by  the 
additional  quantity  of  iron.  In  the  sixth  chapter  of  this  work 
I  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  all  trade,  whether  foreign  or 
domestic,  is  beneficial,  by  increasing  the  quantity  and  not  by 
increasing  the  value  of  productions.  We  shall  have  no  greater 
value  whether  we  carry  on  the  most  beneficial  home  and 
foreign  trade,  or,  in  consequence  of  being  fettered  by  prohibitory 
laws,  we  are  obliged  to  content  ourselves  with  the  least  advan- 
tageous. The  rate  of  profits  and  the  value  produced  will  be 
the  same.  The  advantage  always  resolves  itself  into  that 
which  M.  Say  appears  to  confine  to  the  home  trade;  in  both 
cases  there  is  no  other  gain  but  that  of  the  value  of  a  uiilite  . 
produite.  ^1 

commodities  exchanged  in  that  trade  are  necessarily  the  productions  of* 
the  same  country." — Vol.  i.  p.  84, 

"  The  English  government  has  not  observed  that  the  most  profitable 
sales  are  those  which  a  country  makes  to  itself,  because  they  cannot  take 
place  without  two  values  being  produced  by  the  nation ;  the  value  which 
is  sold,  and  the  value  with  which  the  purchase  is  made." — Vol.  i.  p.  221. 

I  shall,  in  the  twenty-sixth  chapter,  examine  the  soimdness  of  this 
opinion. 


CHAPTER  XXIII 

ON   BOUNTIES   ON   PRODUCTIONS 

It  may  not  be  uninstructive  to  consider  the  effects  of  a  bounty 
on  the  production  of  raw  produce  and  other  commodities,  with 
a  view  to  observe  the  appHcation  of  the  principles  which  I  have 
been  endeavouring  to  estabHsh  with  regard  to  the  profits  of 
stock,  the  division  of  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour,  ♦ 
and  the  relative  prices  of  manufactures  and  raw  produce.  In 
the  first  place,  let  us  suppose  that  a  tax  was  imposed  on  all 
commodities  for  the  purpose  of  raising  a  fund  to  be  employed 
by  government  in  giving  a  bounty  on  the  production  of  com. 
As  no  part  of  such  a  tax  would  be  expended  by  government, 
and  as  all  that  was  received  from  one  class  of  the  people  would 
be  returned  to  another,  the  nation  collectively  would  be  neither 
richer  nor  poorer  from  such  a  tax  and  bounty.  It  would  be 
readily  allowed  that  the  tax  on  commodities  by  which  the  fund 
was  created  would  raise  the  price  of  the  commodities  taxed; 
all  the  consumers  of  those  commodities,  therefore,  would  con- 
tribute towards  that  fund;  in  other  words,  their  natural  or 
necessary  price  being  raised,  so  would,  too,  their  market  price. 
But  for  the  same  reason  that  the  natural  price  of  those  com- 
modities would  be  raised,  the  natural  price  of  com  would  be 
lowered;  before  the  bounty  was  paid  on  production,  the  farmers 
obtained  as  great  a  price  for  their  com  as  was  necessary  to 
repay  them  their  rent  and  their  expenses,  and  afford  them  the 
general  rate  of  profits;  after  the  bounty,  they  would  receive 
more  than  that  rate,  unless  the  price  of  com  fell  by  a  sum  at 
least  equal  to  the  bounty.  The  effect,  then,  of  the  tax  and 
bounty  would  be  to  raise  the  price  of  commodities  in  a  degree 
equal  to  the  tax  levied  on  them,  and  to  lower  the  price  of  com 
by  a  sum  equal  to  the  bounty  paid.  It  will  be  observed,  too, 
that  no  permanent  alteration  could  be  made  in  the  distribution 
of  capital  between  agriculture  and  manufactures,  because,  as 
there  would  be  no  alteration  either  in  the  amount  of  capital  or 
population,  there  would  be  precisely  the  satne  demand  for  bread 
and  manufactures.  The  profits  of  the  farmer  would  be  no  higher 
than  the  general  level  after  the  fall  in  the  price  of  corn;   nor 

215 


1 


21 6  Political  Economy 

would  the  profits  of  the  manufacturer  be  lower  after  the  rise 
of  manufactured  goods;  the  bounty,  then,  would  not  occasion 
any  more  capital  to  be  employed  on  the  land  in  the  production 
of  com,  nor  any  less  in  the  manufacture  of  goods.  But  how 
would  the  interest  of  the  landlord  be  affected?  On  the  same 
principles  that  a  tax  on  raw  produce  would  lower  the  corn  rent 
of  land,  leaving  the  money  rent  unaltered,  a  bounty  on  pro- 
duction, which  is  directly  the  contrary  of  a  tax,  would  raise 
com  rent,  leaving  the  money  rent  unaltered.^  With  the  same 
money  rent  the  landlord  would  have  a  greater  price  to  pay  for 
his  manufactured  goods,  and  a  less  price  for  his  corn;  he  would 
probably,  therefore,  be  neither  richer  nor  poorer. 

Now,  whether  such  a  measure  would  have  any  operation  on 
the  wages  of  labour  would  depend  on  the  question  whether  the 
labourer,  in  purchasing  commodities,  would  pay  as  much  towards 
the  tax  as  he  would  receive  from  the  effects  of  the  bounty  in 
the  low  price  of  his  food.  If  these  two  quantities  were  equal, 
wages  would  continue  unaltered;  but  if  the  commodities  taxed 
were  not  those  consumed  by  the  labourer,  his  wages  would  fall, 
and  his  employer  would  be  benefited  by  the  difference.  But 
this  is  no  real  advantage  to  his  employer;  it  would  indeed 
operate  to  increase  the  rate  of  his  profits,  as  every  fall  of  wages 
must  do;  but  in  proportion  as  the  labourer  contributed  less  to 
the  fund  from  which  the  bounty  was  paid,  and  which,  let  it  be 
remembered,  must  be  raised,  his  employer  must  contribute 
more;  in  other  words,  he  would  contribute  as  much  to  the  tax 
by  his  expenditure  as  he  would  receive  in  the  effects  of  the  _. 
bounty  and  the  higher  rate  of  profits  together.  He  obtains  a  m\ 
higher  rate  of  profits  to  requite  him  for  his  payment,  not  only  "' 
of  his  own  quota  of  the  tax,  but  of  his  labourer's  also;  the 
remuneration  which  he  receives  for  his  labourer's  quota  appears 
in  diminished  wages,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  in  increased 
profits;  the  remuneration  for  his  own  appears  in  the  diminution 
in  the  price  of  the  com  which  he  consumes,  arising  from  the 
bounty. 

Here  it  will  be  proper  to  remark  the  different  effects  produced 
on  profits  from  an  alteration  in  the  real  labour,  or  natural  value 
of  corn,  and  an  alteration  in  the  relative  value  of  com,  from 
taxation  and  from  bounties.  If  corn  is  lowered  in  price  by  an 
alteration  in  its  labour  price,  not  only  will  the  rate  of  the  profits 
of  stock  be  altered,  but  the  condition  of  the  capitalist  will  be 
improved.  With  greater  profits,  he  will  have  no  more  to  pay 
1  See  p.  99. 


On  Bounties  on  Production  217 

for  the  objects  on  which  those  profits  are  expended;  which  does 
not  happen,  as  we  have  just  seen,  when  the  fall  is  occasioned 
artificially  by  a  bounty.  In  the  real  fall  in  the  value  of  com, 
arising  from  less  labour  being  required  to  produce  one  of  the 
most  important  objects  of  man's  consumption,  labour  is  ren- 
dered more  productive.  With  the  same  capital  the  same  labour 
is  employed,  and  an  increase  of  productions  is  the  result;  not 
only  then  will  the  rate  of  profits  be  increased,  but  the  condition 
of  him  who  obtains  them  will  be  improved;  not  only  will  each 
capitalist  have  a  greater  money  revenue,  if  he  employs  the  same 
money  capital,  but  also  when  that  money  is  expended  it  will 
procure  him  a  greater  sum  of  commodities;  his  enjoyments  will 
be  augmented.  In  the  case  of  the  bounty,  to  balance  the  ad- 
vantage which  he  derives  from  thq  fall  of  one  commodity,  he 
has  the  disadvantage  of  paying  a  price  more  than  proportionally 
high  for  another;  he  receives  an  increased  rate  of  profits  in 
order  to  enable  him  to  pay  this  higher  price;  so  that  his  real 
situation,  though  not  deteriorated,  is  in  no  way  improved: 
though  he  gets  a  higher  rate  of  profits,  he  has  no  greater  com- 
mand of  the  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  country. 
When  the  fall  in  the  value  of  com  is  brought  about  by  natural 
causes,  it  is  not  counteracted  by  the  rise  of  other  commodities; 
on  the  contrary,  they  fall  from  the  raw  material  falling  from 
which  they  are  made:  but  when  the  fall  in  corn  is  occasioned 
by  artificial  means,  it  is  always  counteracted  by  a  real  rise  in 
the  value  of  some  other  commodity,  so  that  if  com  be  bought 
cheaper,  other  commodities  are  bought  dearer. 

This,  then,  is  a  further  proof  that  no  particular  disadvantage 
arises  from  taxes  on  necessaries,  on  account  of  their  raising 
wages  and  lowering  the  rate  of  profits.  Profits  are  indeed 
lowered,  but  only  to  the  amount  of  the  labourer's  portion  of 
the  tax,  which  must  at  all  events  be  paid  either  by  his  employer 
or  by  the  consumer  of  the  produce  of  the  labourer's  work. 
Whether  you  deduct  £50  per  annum  from  the  employer's  revenue, 
or  add  £50  to  the  prices  of  the  commodities  which  he  consumes, 
can  be  of  no  other  consequence  to  him  or  to  the  community 
than  as  it  may  equally  affect  all  other  classes.  If  it  be  added 
to  the  prices  of  the  commodity,  a  miser  may  avoid  the  tax  by 
not  consuming;  if  it  be  indirectly  deducted  from  every  man's 
revenue,  he  cannot  avoid  paying  his  fair  proportion  of  the 
public  burthens. 

A  bounty  on  the  production  of  com,  then,  would  produce  no 
real  effect  on  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the 


^^' 


2i8  Political  Economy 

country,  although  it  would  make  com  relatively  cheap 
manufactures  relatively  dear.     But  suppose  now  that  a  contrary 
measure  should  be  adopted — that  a  tax  should  be  raised  on 
com  for  the  purpose  of  affording  a  fund  for  a  bounty  on  the 
production  of  commodities. 

In  such  case,  it  is  evident  that  com  would  be  dear  and  com- 
modities cheap;  labour  would  continue  at  the  same  price  if  the 
labourer  were  as  much  benefited  by  the  cheapness  of  commo- 
dities as  he  was  injured  by  the  deamess  of  corn;  but  if  he  were 
not,  wages  would  rise  and  profits  would  fall,  while  money  rent 
would  continue  the  same  as  before;  profits  would  fall,  because, 
as  we  have  just  explained,  that  would  be  the  mode  in  which 
the  labourer's  share  of  the  tax  would  be  paid  by  the  employers 
of  labour.  By  the  increase  of  wages  the  labourer  would  be 
compensated  for  the  tax  which  he  would  pay  in  the  increased 
price  of  com;  by  not  expending  any  part  of  his  wages  on  the 
manufactured  commodities  he  would  receive  no  part  of  the 
bounty;  the  bounty  would  be  all  received  by  the  employers, 
and  the  tax  would  be  partly  paid  by  the  employed ;  a  remunera- 
tion would  be  made  to  the  labourers,  in  the  shape  of  wages,  for 
this  increased  burden  laid  upon  them,  and  thus  the  rate  of 
profits  would  be  reduced.  In  this  case,  too,  there  would  be  a 
complicated  measure  producing  no  national  result  whatever. 

In  considering  this  question  we  have  purposely  left  out  of  our 
consideration  the  effect  of  such  a  measure  on  foreign  trade ;  we 
have  rather  been  supposing  the  case  of  an  insulated  country 
having  no  commercial  connection  with  other  countries.  We  Jj 
have  seen  that,  as  the  demand  of  the  country  for  com  and  SI 
commodities  would  be  the  same,  whatever  direction  the  bounty 
might  take,  there  would  be  no  temptation  to  remove  capital 
from  one  employment  to  another;  but  this  would  no  longer  be 
the  case  if  there  were  foreign  commerce,  and  that  commerce 
were  free.  By  altering  the  relative  value  of  commodities  and 
com,  by  producing  so  powerful  an  effect  on  their  natural  prices, 
we  should  be  applying  a  strong  stimulus  to  the  exportation  of 
those  commodities  whose  natural  prices  were  lowered,  and  an 
equal  stimulus  to  the  importation  of  those  commodities  whose 
natural  prices  were  raised,  and  thus  such  a  financial  measure 
might  entirely  alter  the  natural  distribution  of  employments, 
to  the  advantage  indeed  of  the  foreign  countries,  but  minously 
to  that  in  which  so  absurd  a  policy  was  adopted. 


CHAPTER  XXIV 

DOCTRINE  OF  ADAM   SMITH   CONCERNING  THE  RENT   OF  LAND 

"  Such  parts  only  of  the  produce  of  land,"  says  Adam  Smith, 

can  commonly  be  brought  to  market  of  which  the  ordinary 
price  is  sufficient  to  replace  the  stock  which  must  be  employed 
in  bringing  them  thither,  together  with  its  ordinary  profits.  If 
the  ordinary  price  is  more  than  this,  the  surplus  part  of  it  v/ill 
naturally  go  to  the  rent  of  land.  If  it  is  not  morty  though  the 
commodity  can  he  brought  to  market ,  it  can  afford  no  rent  to  the 
landlord.  Whether  the  price  is,  or  is  not  more,  depends  upon 
the  demand." 

This  passage  would  naturally  lead  the  reader  to  conclude  that 
its  author  could  not  have  mistaken  the  nature  of  rent,  and  that 
he  must  have  seen  that  the  quality  of  land  which  the  exigencies 
of  society  might  require  to  be  taken  into  cultivation  would 
depend  on  **  the  ordinary  price  of  its  produce''  7vhether  it  were 
'*  sufficient  to  replace  the  stock  which  must  be  employed  in  culti- 
vating it,  together  with  its  ordinary  profits.'^ 

But  he  had  adopted  the  notion  that  "  there  were  some  parts 
of  the  produce  of  land  for  which  the  demand  must  always  be 
such  as  to  afford  a  greater  price  than  what  is  sufficient  to  bring 
them  to  market;  "  and  he  considered  food  as  one  of  those  parts. 

He  says  that  "  land,  in  almost  any  situation,  produces  a 
greater  quantity  of  food  than  what  is  sufficient  to  maintain  all 
the  labour  necessary  for  bringing  it  to  market,  in  the  most 
liberal  way  in  which  that  labour  is  ever  maintained.  The 
surplus,  too,  is  always  more  than  sufficient  to  replace  the  stock 
which  employed  that  labour,  together  with  its  profits.  Some- 
thing, therefore,  always  remains  for  a  rent  to  the  landlord." 

But  what  proof  does  he  give  of  this? — no  other  than  the 
assertion  that  "  the  most  desert  moors  in  Norway  and  Scotland 
produce  some  sort  of  pasture  for  cattle,  of  which  the  milk  and 
the  increase  are  always  more  than  sufficient,  not  only  to  main- 
tain all  the  labour  necessary  for  tending  them,  and  to  pay  the 
ordinary  profit  to  the  farmer,  or  owner  of  the  herd  or  flock,  but 
to  afford  some  small  rent  to  the  landlord."  Now,  of  this  I 
may  be  permitted  to  entertain  a  doubt;  I  believe  that  as  yet 
in  every  country,  from  the  rudest  to  the  most  refined,  there  is 

219 


1 

i  than"' 


220  Political  Economy 

land  of  such  a  quality  that  it  cannot  yield  a  produce  more 
sufficiently  valuable  to  replace  the  stock  employed  upon  it, 
together  with  the  profits  ordinary  and  usual  in  that  country. 
In  America  we  all  know  that  this  is  the  case,  and  yet  no  one 
maintains  that  the  principles  which  regulate  rent  are  different 
in  that  country  and  in  Europe.  But  if  it  were  true  that  Eng- 
land had  so  far  advanced  in  cultivation  that  at  this  time  there 
were  no  lands  remaining  which  did  not  afford  a  rent,  it  would 
be  equally  true  that  there  formerly  must  have  been  such  lands; 
and  that  whether  there  be  or  not  is  of  no  importance  to  this 
question,  for  it  is  the  same  thing  if  there  be  any  capital  employed 
in  Great  Britain  on  land  which  yields  only  the  return  of  stock 
with  its  ordinary  profits,  whether  it  be  employed  on  old  or  on 
new  land.  If  a  farmer  agrees  for  land  on  a  lease  of  seven  or 
fourteen  years,  he  may  propose  to  employ  on  it  a  capital  of 
£10,000,  knowing  that  at  the  existing  price  of  grain  and  raw 
produce  he  can  replace  that  part  of  his  stock  which  he  is  obliged 
to  expend,  pay  his  rent,  and  obtain  the  general  rate  of  profit. 
He  will  not  employ  £11,000,  unless  the  last  £1000  can  be  eip- 
ployed  so  productively  as  to  afford  him  the  usual  profits  of  stock. 
In  his  calculation,  whether  he  shall  employ  it  or  not,  he  con- 
siders only  whether  the  price  of  raw  produce  is  sufficient  to 
replace  his  expenses  and  profits,  for  he  knows  that  he  shall  have 
no  additional  rent  to  pay.  Even  at  the  expiration  of  his  lease 
his  rent  will  not  be  raised;  for  if  his  landlord  should  require 
rent,  because  this  additional  £1000  wajs  employed,  he  would 
withdraw  it;  since,  by  employing  it,  he  gets,  by  the  supposition, 
only  the  ordinary  and  usual  profits  which  he  may  obtain  by 
any  other  employment  of  stock;  and,  therefore,  he  canno 
afford  to  pay  rent  for  it,  unless  the  price  of  raw  produce  shou' 
further  rise,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  unless  the  usual  an 
general  rate  of  profits  should  fall. 

If  the  comprehensive  mind  of  Adam  Smith  had  been  directed 
to  this  fact,  he  would  not  have  maintained  that  rent  forms  one 
of  the  component  parts  of  the  price  of  raw  produce;  for  price 
is  everywhere  regulated  by  the  return  obtained  by  this  last 
portion  of  capital,  for  which  no  rent  whatever  is  paid.  If  he 
had  adverted  to  this  principle,  he  would  have  made  no  dis- 
tinction between  the  law  which  regulates  the  rent  of  mines  and 
the  rent  of  land. 

"  Whether  a  coal  mine,  for  example,"  he  says,  "  can  afford 
any  rent  depends  partly  upon  its  fertility  and  partly  upon  its 
situation.    A  mine  of  any  kind  may  be  said  to  be  either  fertile 


10^ 


The  Rent  of  Land  22  i 

or  barren  according  as  the  quantity  of  mineral  which  can  be 
brought  from  it  by  a  certain  quantity  of  labour  is  greater  or 
less  than  what  can  be  brought  by  an  equal  quantity  from  the 
greater  part  of  other  mines  of  the  same  kind.  Some  coal  mines, 
advantageously  situated,  cannot  be  wrought  on  account  of  their 
barrenness.  The  produce  does  not  pay  the  expense.  They 
can  afford  neither  profit  nor  rent.  There  are  some  of  which 
the  produce  is  barely  sufficient  to  pay  the  labour  and  replace, 
together  with  its  ordinary  profits,  the  stock  employed  in  working 
them.  They  afford  some  profit  to  the  undertaker  of  the  work, 
but  no  rent  to  the  landlord.  They  can  be  wrought  advanta- 
geously by  nobody  but  the  landlord,  who  being  himself  the 
undertaker  of  the  work,  gets  the  ordinary  profit  of  the  capital 
which  he  employs  in  it.  Many  coal  mines  in  Scotland  are 
wrought  in  this  manner,  and  can  be  wrought  in  no  other.  The 
landlord  will  allow  nobody  else  to  work  them  without  paying 
some  rent,  and  nobody  can  afford  to  pay  any. 

"  Other  coal  mines  in  the  same  country,  sufficiently  fertile, 
cannot  be  wrought  on  account  of  their  situation.  A  quantity 
of  mineral  sufficient  to  defray  the  expense  of  working  could  be 
brought  from  the  mine  by  the  ordinary,  or  even  less  than  the 
ordinary,  quantity  of  labour;  but  in  an  inland  country,  thinly 
inhabited,  and  without  either  good  roads  or  water-carriage, 
this  quantity  could  not  be  sold."  The  whole  principle  of  rent 
is  here  admirably  and  perspicuously  explained,  but  every  word 
is  as  applicable  to  land  as  it  is  to  mines;  yet  he  affirms  that  **  it 
is  otherwise  in  estates  above  ground.  The  proportion,  both 
of  their  produce  and  of  their  rent,  is  in  proportion  to  their 
absolute,  and  not  to  their  relative,  fertility."  But,  suppose 
that  there  were  no  land  which  did  not  afford  a  rent;  then  the 
amount  of  rent  on  the  worst  land  would  be  in  proportion  to  the 
excess  of  the  value  of  the  produce  above  the  expenditure  of 
capital  and  the  ordinary  profits  of  stock:  the  same  principle 
would  govern  the  rent  of  land  of  a  somewhat  better  quality,  or 
more  favourably  situated,  and,  therefore,  the  rent  of  this  land 
would  exceed  the  rent  of  that  inferior  to  it  by  the  superior 
advantages  which  it  possessed;  the  same  might  be  said  of  that 
of  the  third  quality,  and  so  on  to  the  very  best.  Is  it  not,  then, 
as  certain  that  it  is  the  relative  fertility  of  the  land  which 
determines  the  portion  of  the  produce  which  shall  be  paid  for 
the  rent  of  land  as  it  is  that  the  relative  fertility  of  mines  deter- 
mines the  portion  of  their  produce  which  shall  be  paid  for  the 
rent  of  mines  ? 


■ 


222  Political  Economy 

After  Adam  Smith  has  declared  that  there  are  some  mines 
which  can  only  be  worked  by  the  owners,  as  they  will  afford  only 
sufficient  to  defray  the  expense  of  working,  together  with  the 
ordinary  profits  of  the  capital  employed,  we  should  expect  that 
he  would  admit  that  it  was  these  particular  mines  which  regu- 
lated the  price  of  the  produce  from  all  mines.  If  the  old  mines 
are  insufficient  to  supply  the  quantity  of  coal  required,  the 
price  of  coal  will  rise,  and  will  continue  rising  till  the  owner  of 
a  new  and  inferior  mine  finds  that  he  can  obtain  the  usual  profits 
of  stock  by  working  his  mine.  If  his  mine  be  tolerably  fertile, 
the  rise  will  not  be  great  before  it  becomes  his  interest  so  to 
employ  his  capital;  but  if  it  be  not  tolerably  fertile,  it  is  evident 
that  the  price  must  continue  to  rise  till  it  will  afford  him  the 
means  of  paying  his  expenses,  and  obtaining  the  ordinary 
profits  of  stock.  It  appears,  then,  that  it  is  always  the  least 
fertile  mine  which  regulates  the  price  of  coal.  Adam  Smith, 
however,  is  of  a  different  opinion:  he  observes  that  '*  the  most 
fertile  coal  mine,  too,  regulates  the  price  of  coals  at  all  the  other 
mines  in  its  neighbourhood.  Both  the  proprietor  and  the 
undertaker  of  the  work  find,  the  one  that  he  can  get  a  greater 
rent,  the  other  that  he  can  get  a  greater  profit,  by  somewhat 
underselling  all  their  neighbours.  Their  neighbours  are  soon 
obliged  to  sell  at  the  same  price,  though  they  cannot  so  well 
afford  it,  and  though  it  always  diminishes,  and  sometimes  takes 
away  altogether,  both  their  rent  and  their  profit.  Some  works 
are  abandoned  altogether;  others  can  afford  no  rent,  and  can 
be  wrought  only  by  the  proprietor."  If  the  demand  for  coal 
should  be  diminished,  or  if  by  new  processes  the  quantity  should 
be  increased,  the  price  would  fall,  and  some  mines  would  be 
abandoned;  but  in  every  case,  the  price  must  be  sufficient  to 
pay  the  expenses  and  profit  of  that  mine  which  is  worked  with- 
out being  charged  with  rent.  It  is,  therefore,  the  least  fertile 
mine  which  regulates  price.  Indeed,  it  is  so  stated  in  another 
place  by  Adam  Smith  himself,  for  he  says,  "  The  lowest  price 
at  which  coals  can  be  sold  for  any  considerable  time  is  like  that 
of  all  other  commodities,  the  price  which  is  barely  sufficient 
to  replace,  together  with  its  ordinary  profits,  the  stock  which 
must  be  employed  in  bringing  them  to  market.  At  a  coal 
mine  for  which  the  landlord  can  get  no  rent,  but  which  he  must 
either  work  himself,  or  let  it  alone  all  altogether,  the  price  of 
coals  must  generally  be  nearly  about  this  price." 

But  the  same  circumstance,  namely,  the  abundance  and 
consequent  cheapness  of  coals,  from  whatever  cause  it  may 


I 


The  Rent  of  Land  223 

arise,  which  would  make  it  necessary  to  abandon  those  mines 
on  which  there  was  no  rent,  or  a  very  moderate  one,  would,  if 
there  were  the  same  abundance  and  consequent  cheapness  of 
raw  produce,  render  it  necessary  to  abandon  the  cultivation  of 
those  lands  for  which  either  no  rent  was  paid  or  a  very  moderate 
one.  If,  for  example,  potatoes  should  become  the  general  and 
common  food  of  the  people,  as  rice  is  in  some  countries,  one- 
fourth  or  one-half  of  the  land  now  in  cultivation  would  probably 
be  immediately  abandoned;  for  if,  as  Adam  Smith  says,  "  an 
acre  of  potatoes  will  produce  six  thousand  weight  of  solid 
nourishment,  three  times  the  quantity  produced  by  the  acre  of 
wheat,"  there  could  not  be  for  a  considerable  time  such  a  multi- 
plication of  people  as  to  consume  the  quantity  that  might  be 
raised  on  the  land  before  employed  for  the  cultivation  of  wheat; 
much  land  would  consequently  be  abandoned,  and  rent  would 
fall ;  and  it  would  not  be  till  the  population  had  been  doubled  or 
trebled  that  the  same  quantity  of  land  could  be  in  cultivation 
and  the  rent  paid  for  it  as  high  as  before. 

Neither  would  any  greater  proportion  of  the  gross  produce  be 
paid  to  the  landlord  whether  it  consisted  of  potatoes,  which 
would  feed  three  hundred  people,  or  of  wheat,  which  would  feed 
only  one  hundred;  because,  though  the  expenses  of  production 
would  be  very  much  diminished  if  the  labourer's  wages  were 
chiefly  regulated  by  the  price  of  potatoes,  and  not  by  the  price 
of  wheat,  and  though,  therefore,  the  proportion  of  the  whole 
gross  produce,  after  paying  the  labourers,  would  be  greatly 
increased,  yet  no  part  of  that  additional  proportion  would  go 
to  rent,  but  the  whole  invariably  to  profits — profits  being  at  all 
times  raised  as  wages  fall,  and  lowered  as  wages  rise.  Whether 
wheat  or  potatoes  were  cultivated,  rent  would  be  governed 
by  the  same  principle — it  would  be  always  equal  to  the  dif- 
ference between  the  quantities  of  produce  obtained  with  equal 
capitals,  either  on  the  same  land  or  on  land  of  different  quali- 
ties; and,  therefore,  while  lands  of  the  same  quality  were 
cultivated,  and  there  was  no  alteration  in  their  relative  fertility 
or  advantages,  rent  would  always  bear  the  same  proportion 
to  the  gross  produce. 

Adam  Smith,  however,  maintains  that  the  proportion  which 
falls  to  the  landlord  would  be  increased  by  a  diminished  cost  of 
production,  and,  therefore,  that  he  would  receive  a  larger  share 
as  well  as  a  larger  quantity  from  an  abundant  than  from  a 
scanty  produce.  "  A  rice  field,"  he  says,  "  produces  a  much 
greater  quantity  of  food  than  the  most  fertile  com  field.     Two 


224  Political  Economy 


1 

re  said"' 


crops  m  the  year,  from  thirty  to  sixty  bushels  each,  are 
to  be  the  ordinary  produce  of  an  acre.  Though  its  cultivation, 
therefore,  requires  more  labour,  a  much  greater  surplus  remains 
after  maintaining  all  that  labour.  In  those  rice  countries, 
therefore,  where  rice  is  the  common  and  favourite  vegetable 
food  of  the  people,  and  where  the  cultivators  are  chiefly  main- 
tained with  it,  a  greater  share  of  this  greater  surplus  should  belong 
to  the  landlord  than  in  corn  countries ^ 

Mr.  Buchanan  also  remarks  that  "  it  is  quite  clear  that  if  any 
other  produce,  which  the  land  yielded  more  abundantly  than 
corn,  were  to  become  the  common  food  of  the  people,  the  rent 
of  the  landlord  would  be  improved  in  proportion  to  its  greater 
abundance." 

If  potatoes  were  to  become  the  common  food  of  the  people," 
there  would  be  a  long  interval  during  which  the  landlords  would 
suffer  an  enormous  deduction  of  rent.  They  would  not  probably 
receive  nearly  so  much  of  the  sustenance  of  man  as  they  now 
receive,  while  that  sustenance  would  fall  to  a  third  of  its  present 
value.  But  all  manufactured  commodities,  on  which  a  part 
of  the  landlord's  rent  is  expended,  would  suffer  no  other  fall 
than  that  which  proceeded  from  the  fall  in  the  raw  material 
of  which  they  were  made,  and  which  would  arise  only  from  the 
gfeater  fertility  of  the  land  which  might  then  be  devoted  to  its 
production. 

When,  from  the  progress  of  population,  land  of  the  same 
quality  as  before  should  be  taken  into  cultivation,  the  landlord 
would  have  not  only  the  same  proportion  of  the  produce  as 
before,  but  that  proportion  would  also  be  of  the  same  value  as 
before.  Rent,  then,  would  be  the  same  as  before;  profits, 
however,  would  be  much  higher,  because  the  price  of  food,  and 
consequently  wages,  would  be  much  lower.  High  profits  are 
favourable  to  the  accumulation  of  capital.  The  demand  for 
labour  would  further  increase,  and  landlords  would  be  perma- 
nently benefited  by  the  increased  demand  for  land. 

Indeed,  the  very  same  lands  might  be  cultivated  much  higher 
when  such  an  abundance  of  food  could  be  produced  from  them, 
and,  consequently,  they  would,  in  the  progress  of  society,  admit 
of  much  higher  rents,  and  would  sustain  a  much  greater  popula- 
tion than  before.  This  could  not  fail  to  be  highly  beneficial  to 
landlords,  and  is  consistent  with  the  principle  which  this  inquiry, 
I  think,  will  not  fail  to  establish — that  all  extraordinary  profits 
are  in  their  nature  but  of  limited  duration,  as  the  whole  surplus 
produce  of  the  soil,  after  deducting  from  it  only  such  moderate 


« 


I 


The  Rent  of  Land  225 

profits  as  are  sufficient  to  encourage  accumulation,  must  finally 
rest  with  the  landlord. 

With  so  low  a  price  of  labour  as  such  an  abundant  produce 
would  cause,  not  only  would  the  lands  already  in  cultivation 
yield  a  much  greater  quantity  of  produce,  but  they  would  admit 
of  a  great  additional  capital  being  employed  on  them,  and  a 
greater  value  to  be  drawn  from  them,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
lands  of  a  very  inferior  quality  could  be  cultivated  with  high 
profits,  to  the  great  advantage  of  landlords,  as  well  as  to  the 
whole  class  of  consumers.  The  machine  which  produced  the 
most  important  article  of  consumption  would  be  improved,  and 
would  be  well  paid  for  according  as  its  services  were  demanded. 
All  the  advantages  would,  in  the  first  instance,  be  enjoyed  by 
labourers,  capitalists,  and  consumers;  but,  with  the  progress 
of  population,  they  would  be  gradually  transferred  to  the 
proprietors  of  the  soil. 

Independently  of  these  improvements,  in  which  the  com- 
munity have  an  immediate  and  the  landlords  a  remote  interest, 
the  interest  of  the  landlord  is  always  opposed  to  that  of  the 
consumer  and  manufacturer.  Com  can  be  permanently  at  an 
advanced  price  only  because  additional  labour  is  necessary  to 
produce  it;  because  its  cost  of  production  is  increased.  The 
same  cause  invariably  raises  rent,  it  is  therefore  for  the  interest 
of  the  landlord  that  the  cost  attending  the  production  of  corn 
should  be  increased.  This,  however,  is  not  the  interest  of  the 
consumer;  to  him  it  is  desirable  that  com  should  be  low  rela- 
tively to  money  and  commodities,  for  it  is  always  with  com- 
modities or  money  that  com  is  purchased.  Neither  is  it  the 
interest  of  the  manufacturer  that  corn  should  be  at  a  high  price, 
for  the  high  price  of  corn  will  occasion  high  wages,  but  will  not 
raise  the  price  of  his  commodity.  Not  only,  then,  must  more 
of  his  commodity,  or,  which  comes  to  the  same  thing,  the  value 
of  more  of  his  commodity,  be  given  in  exchange  for  the  corn 
which  he  himself  consumes,  but  more  must  be  given,  or  the 
value  of  more,  for  wages  to  his  workmen,  for  which  he  will 
receive  no  remuneration.  All  classes,  therefore,  except  the 
landlords,  will  be  injured  by  the  increase  in  the  price  of  corn. 
The  dealings  between  the  landlord  and  the  public  are  not  like 
dealings  in  trade,  whereby  both  the  seller  and  buyer  may  equally 
be  said  to  gain,  but  the  loss  is  wholly  on  one  side,  and  the  gain 
wholly  on  the  other;  and  if  com  could  by  importation  be  pro- 
cured cheaper,  the  loss  in  consequence  of  not  importing  is  far 
greater  on  one  side  than  the  gain  is  on  the  other. 

p 


226  Political  Economy 

Adam  Smith  never  makes  any  distinction  between  a  low  value 
of  money  and  a  high  value  of  com,  and  therefore  infers  that  the 
interest  of  the  landlord  is  not  opposed  to  that  of  the  rest  of  the 
community.  In  the  first  case,  money  is  low  relatively  to  all  com- 
modities; in  the  other,  corn  is  high  relatively  to  all.  In  the  first, 
com  and  commodities  continue  at  the  same  relative  values ;  in  the 
second,  corn  is  higher  relatively  to  commodities  as  well  as  money. 

The  following  observation  of  Adam  Smith  is  applicable  to  a 
low  value  of  money,  but  it  is  totally  inapplicable  to  a  high  value 
of  com.  "  If  importation  (of  corn)  was  at  all  times  free,  our 
farmers  and  country  gentlemen  would  probably,  one  year  with 
another,  get  less  money  for  their  com  than  they  do  at  present 
when  importation  is  at  most  times  in  effect  prohibited ;  but  the 
money  which  they  got  would  be  of  more  value,  would  buy  more 
goods  of  all  other  kinds,  and  would  employ  more  labour.  Their 
real  wealth,  their  real  revenue,  therefore,  would  be  the  same  as 
at  present,  though  it  might  be  expressed  by  a  smaller  quantity 
of  silver;  and  they  would  neither  be  disabled  nor  discouraged 
from  cultivating  com  as  much  as  they  do  at  present.  On  the 
contrary,  as  the  rise  in  the  real  value  of  silver,  in  consequence 
of  lowering  the  money  price  of  com,  lowers  somewhat  the  money 
price  of  all  other  commodities,  it  gives  the  industry  of  the 
country  where  it  takes  place  some  advantage  in  all  foreign 
markets,  and  thereby  tends  to  encourage  and  increase  that 
industry.  But  the  extent  of  the  home  market  for  com  must 
be  in  proportion  to  the  general  industry  of  the  country  where 
it  grows,  or  to  the  number  of  those  who  produce  something  else 
to  give  in  exchange  for  corn.  But  in  every  country  the  home 
market,  as  it  is  the  nearest  and  most  convenient,  so  is  it  likewise 
the  greatest  and  most  important  market  for  com.  That  rise  in 
the  real  value  of  silver,  therefore,  which  is  the  effect  of  lowering 
the  average  money  price  of  com,  tends  to  enlarge  the  greatest 
and  most  important  market  for  corn,  and  thereby  to  encourage 
instead  of  discouraging  its  growth." 

A  high  or  low  money  price  of  com,  arising  from  the  abundance 
and  cheapness  of  gold  and  silver,  is  of  no  importance  to  the  land- 
lord, as  every  sort  of  produce  would  be  equally  affected  just  as 
Adam  Smith  describes ;  but  a  relatively  high  price  of  com  is  at 
all  times  greatly  beneficial  to  the  landlord;  for,  first,  it  gives 
him  a  greater  quantity  of  com  for  rent;  and,  secondly,  for  every 
equal  measure  of  com  he  will  have  a  command,  not  only  over 
a  greater  quantity  of  money,  but  over  a  greater  quantity  of 
every  commodity  which  money  can  purchase. 


CHAPTER  XXV 

ON   COLONIAL   TRADE 

Adam  Smith,  in  his  observations  on  colonial  trade,  has  shown 
most  satisfactorily  the  advantages  of  a  free  trade,  and  .the  in- 
justice suffered  by  colonies  in  being  prevented  by  their  mother 
countries  from  selling  their  produce  at  the  dearest  market  and 
buying  their  manufactures  and  stores  at  the  cheapest.  He  has 
shown  that,  by  permitting  every  country  freely  to  exchange  the 
produce  of  its  industry  when  and  where  it  pleases,  the  best 
distribution  of  the  labour  of  the  world  will  be  effected,  and  the 
greatest  abundance  of  the  necessaries  and  enjoyments  of  human 
life  will  be  secured. 

He  has  attempted  also  to  show  that  this  freedom  of  commerce, 
which  undoubtedly  promotes  the  interest  of  the  whole,  promotes 
also  that  of  each  particular  country;  and  that  the  narrow  policy 
adopted  in  the  countries  of  Europe  respecting  their  colonies  is 
not  less  injurious  to  the  mother  countries  themselves  than  to 
the  colonies  whose  interests  are  sacrificed. 

"  The  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade,"  he  says,  "  like  all  the 
other  mean  and  malignant  expedients  of  the  mercantile  system, 
depresses  the  industry  of  all  other  countries,  but  chiefly  that  of 
the  colonies,  without  in  the  least  increasing,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
diminishing  that  of  the  country  in  whose  favour  it  is  established." 

This  part  of  his  subject,  however,  is  not  treated  in  so  clear  and 
convincing  a  manner  as  that  in  which  he  shows  the  injustice  of 
this  system  towards  the  colony. 

It  may,  I  think,  be  doubted  whether  a  mother  country  may 
not  sometimes  be  benefited  by  the  restraints  to  which  she  sub- 
jects her  colonial  possessions.  Who  can  doubt,  for  example, 
that  if  England  were  the  colony  of  France,  the  latter  country 
would  be  benefited  by  a  heavy  bounty  paid  by  England  on  the 
exportation  of  com,  cloth,  or  any  other  commodities?  In 
examining  the  question  of  bounties,  on  the  supposition  of  corn 
being  at  £4  per  quarter  in  this  country,  we  saw  that  with  a 
bounty  of  105.  per  quarter  on  exportation  in  England,  com 
would  have  been  reduced  to  £3  105.  in  France.  Now,  if  corn 
had  previously  been  at  £3  155.  per  quarter  in  France,  the  French 

227 


228  Political  Economy 


consumers  would  have  been  benefited  by  5^.  per  quarter  on  all 
imported  corn ;  if  the  natural  price  of  corn  in  France  were  before 
£4,  they  would  have  gained  the  whole  bounty  of  105.  per  quarter. 
France  would  thus  be  benefited  by  the  loss  sustained  by  Eng- 
land :  she  would  not  gain  a  part  only  of  what  England  lost,  but 
the  whole. 

It  may,  however,  be  said  that  a  bounty  on  exportation  is  a 
measure  of  internal  policy,  and  could  not  easily  be  imposed  by 
the  mother  country. 

If  it  would  suit  the  interests  of  Jamaica  and  Holland  to  make 
an  exchange  of  the  commodities  which  they  respectively  pro- 
duce, without  the  intervention  of  England,  it  is  quite  certain 
that  by  their  being  prevented  from  so  doing  the  interests  of 
Holland  and  Jamaica  would  suffer;  but  if  Jamaica  is  obliged 
to  send  her  goods  to  England,  and  there  exchange  them  for 
Dutch  goods,  an  English  capital,  or  English  agency,  will  be 
employed  in  a  trade  in  which  it  would  not  otherwise  be  engaged. 
It  is  allured  thither  by  a  bounty,  not  paid  by  England,  but  by 
Holland  and  Jamaica. 

That  the  loss  sustained  through  a  disadvantageous  distribu- 
tion of  labour  in  two  countries  may  be  beneficial  to  one  of  them, 
while  the  other  is  made  to  suffer  more  than  the  loss  actually 
belonging  to  such  a  distribution,  has  been  stated  by  Adam  Smith 
himself;  which,  if  true,  will  at  once  prove  that  a  measure  which 
may  be  greatly  hurtful  to  a  colony  may  be  partially  beneficial 
to  the  mother  country. 

Speaking  of  treaties  of  commerce,  he  says,  "  When  a  nation 
binds  itself  by  treaty,  either  to  permit  the  entry  of  certain  goods 
from  one  foreign  country  which  it  prohibits  from  all  others,  or 
to  exempt  the  goods  of  one  country  from  duties  to  which  it 
subjects  those  of  all  others,  the  country,  or  at  least  the  merchants 
and  manufacturers  of  the  country,  whose  commerce  is  so 
favoured,  must  necessarily  derive  great  advantage  from  the 
treaty.  Those  merchants  and  manufacturers  enjoy  a  sort  of 
monopoly  in  the  country  which  is  so  indulgent  to  them.  That 
country  becomes  a  market  both  more  extensive  and  more 
advantageous  for  their  goods ;  more  extensive,  because  the  goods 
of  other  nations,  being  either  excluded  or  subjected  to  heavier 
duties,  it  takes  off  a  greater  quantity  of  them;  more  advan- 
tageous, because  the  merchants  of  the  favoured  country,  enjoy- 
ing a  sort  of  monopoly  there,  will  often  sell  their  goods  for  a 
better  price  than  if  exposed  to  the  free  competition  of  all  other 
nations." 


On  Colonial  Trade  229 

Let  tlie  two  nations  between  which  the  commercial  treaty  is 
made  be  the  mother  country  and  her  colony,  and  Adam  Smith, 
it  is  evident,  admits  that  a  mother  country  may  be  benefited  by 
oppressing  her  colony.  It  may,  however,  be  again  remarked, 
that  unless  the  monopoly  of  the  foreign  market  be  in  the  hands 
of  an  exclusive  company,  no  more  will  be  paid  for  commodities 
by  foreign  purchasers  than  by  home  purchasers ;  the  price  which 
they  will  both  pay  will  not  differ  greatly  from  their  natural 
price  in  the  country  where  they  are  produced.  England,  for 
example,  will,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  always  be  able  to 
buy  French  goods  at  the  natural  price  of  those  goods  in  France, 
and  France  would  have  an  equal  privilege  of  buying  English 
goods  at  their  natural  price  in  England.  But  at  these  prices 
goods  would  be  bought  without  a  treaty.  Of  what  advantage 
or  disadvantage,  then,  is  the  treaty  to  either  party  ? 

The  disadvantage  of  the  treaty  to  the  importing  country 
would  be  this:  it  would  bind  her  to  purchase  a  commodity, 
from  England,  for  example,  at  the  natural  price  of  that  com- 
modity in  England,  when  she  might  perhaps  have  bought  it  at 
the  much  lower  natural  price  of  some  other  country.  It  occa- 
sions then  a  disadvantageous  distribution  of  the  general  capital, 
which  falls  chiefly  on  the  country  bound  by  its  treaty  to  buy 
in  the  least  productive  market;  but  it  gives  no  advantage  to  the 
seller  on  account  of  any  supposed  monopoly,  for  he  is  prevented 
by  the  competition  of  his  own  countrymen  from  selling  his  goods 
above  their  natural  price;  at  which  he  would  sell  them,  whether 
he  exported  them  to  France,  Spain,  or  the  West  Indies,  or  sold 
them  for  home  consumption. 

In  what,  then,  does  the  advantage  of  the  stipulation  in  the 
treaty  consist  ?  It  consists  in  this :  these  particular  goods  could 
not  have  been  made  in  England  for  exportation,  but  for  the 
privilege  which  she  alone  had  of  serving  this  particular  market; 
for  the  competition  of  that  countrj^  where  the  natural  price  was 
lower,  would  have  deprived  her  of  all  chance  of  selling  those 
commodities.  This,  however,  would  have  been  of  little  import- 
ance if  England  were  quite  secure  that  she  could  sell  to  the 
same  amount  any  other  goods  which  she  might  fabricate,  either 
in  the  French  market  or  with  equal  advantage  in  any  other. 
The  object  which  England  has  in  view  is,  for  example,  to  buy 
a  quantity  of  French  wines  of  the  value  of  £5000 — she  desires, 
then,  to  sell  goods  somewhere  by  which  she  may  get  £5000  for 
this  purpose.  If  France  gives  her  a  monopoly  of  the  cloth 
market  she  will  readily  export  cloth  for  this  purpose;    but  if 


230  Political  Economy 


■ 

event 


the  trade  is  free,  the  competition  of  other  countries  may  prev 
the  natural  price  of  cloth  in  England  from  being  sufficiently  low 
to  enable  her  to  get  £5000  by  the  sale  of  clothj  and  to  obtain 
the  usual  profits  by  such  an  employment  of  her  stock.  The 
industry  of  England  must  be  employed,  then,  on  some  other 
commodity;  but  there  may  be  none  of  her  productions  which, 
at  the  existing  value  of  money,  she  can  afford  to  sell  at  the 
natural  price  of  other  countries.  What  is  the  consequence? 
The  wine  drinkers  of  England  are  still  willing  to  give  £5000  for 
their  wine,  and  consequently  £5000  in  money  is  exported  to 
France  for  that  purpose.  By  this  exportation  of  money,  its 
value  is  raised  in  England  and  lowered  in  other  countries ;  and 
with  it  the  natural  price  of  all  commodities  produced  by  British 
industry  is  also  lowered.  The  advance  in  the  value  of  money 
is  the  same  thing  as  the  decline  in  the  price  of  commodities. 
To  obtain  £5000,  British  commodities  may  now  be  exported; 
for  at  their  reduced  natural  price  they  may  now  enter  into 
competition  with  the  goods  of  other  countries.  More  goods 
are  sold,  however,  at  the  low  prices  to  obtain  the  £5000  required, 
which,  when  obtained,  will  not  procure  the  same  quantity  of 
wine;  because,  whilst  the  diminution  of  money  in  England  has 
lowered  the  natural  price  of  goods  there,  the  increase  of  money 
in  France  has  raised  the  natural  price  of  goods  and  wine  in 
France.  Less  wine,  then,  will  be  imported  into  England,  in 
exchange  for  its  commodities,  when  the  trade  is  perfectly  free 
than  when  she  is  peculiarly  favoured  by  commercial  treaties. 
The  rate  of  profits,  however,  will  not  have  varied;  money  will 
have  altered  in  relative  value  in  the  two  countries,  and  the 
advantage  gained  by  France  will  be  the  obtaining  a  greater 
quantity  of  English,  in  exchange  for  a  given  quantity  of  French, 
goods,  while  the  loss  sustained  by  England  will  consist  in  ob- 
taining a  smaller  quantity  of  French  goods  in  exchange  for  a 
given  quantity  of  those  of  England. 

Foreign  trade,  then,  whether  fettered,  encouraged,  or  free, 
will  always  continue,  whatever  may  be  the  comparative  difficulty 
of  production  in  different  countries;  but  it  can  only  be  regulated 
by  altering  the  natural  price,  not  the  natural  value,  at  which 
commodities  can  be  produced  in  those  countries,  and  that  is 
effected  by  altering  the  distribution  of  the  precious  metals. 
This  explanation  confirms  the  opinion  which  I  have  elsewhere 
given,  that  there  is  not  a  tax,  a  bounty,  or  a  prohibition  on  the 
importation  or  exportation  of  commodities  which  does  not 
occasion  a  different  distribution  of  the  precious  metals,  and 


On  Colonial  Trade  231 

which  does  not,  therefore,  everywhere  alter  both  the  natural  and 
the  market  price  of  commodities. 

It  is  evident,  then,  that  the  trade  with  a  colony  may  be  so 
regulated  that  it  shall  at  the  same  time  be  less  beneficial  to  the 
colony,  and  more  beneficial  to  the  mother  country,  than  a  per- 
fectly free  trade.  As  it  is  disadvantageous  to  a  single  consumer 
to  be  restricted  in  his  dealings  to  one  particular  shop,  so  is  it 
disadvantageous  for  a  nation  of  consumers  to  be  obliged  to 
purchase  of  one  particular  country.  If  the  shop  or  the  country 
afforded  the  goods  required  the  cheapest,  they  would  be  secure 
of  selling  them  without  any  such  exclusive  privilege;  and  if 
they  did  not  sell  cheaper,  the  general  interest  would  require  that 
they  should  not  be  encouraged  to  continue  a  trade  which  they 
could  not  carry  on  at  an  equal  advantage  with  others.  The 
shop,  or  the  selling  country,  might  lose  by  the  change  of  employ- 
ments, but  the  general  benefit  is  never  so  fully  secured  as  by  the 
most  productive  distribution  of  the  general  capital;  that  is  to 
say,  by  a  universally  free  trade. 

An  increase  in  the  cost  of  production  of  a  commodity,  if  it  be 
an  article  of  the  first  necessity,  will  not  necessarily  diminish  its 
consumption ;  for  although  tlie  general  power  of  the  purchasers 
to  consume  is  diminished  by  the  rise  of  any  one  commodity,  yet 
they  may  relinquish  the  consumption  of  some  other  commodity 
whose  cost  of  production  has  not  risen.  In  that  case,  the  quan- 
tity supplied,  and  the  quantity  demanded,  will  be  the  same  as 
before;  the  cost  of  production  only  will  have  increased,  and  yet 
the  price  will  rise,  and  must  rise,  to  place  the  profits  of  the 
producer  of  the  enhanced  commodity  on  a  level  with  the  profits 
derived  from  other  trades. 

M.  Say  acknowledges  that  the  cost  of  production  is  the 
foundation  of  price,  and  yet  in  various  parts  of  his  book  he 
maintains  that  price  is  regulated  by  the  proportion  which 
demand  bears  to  supply.  The  real  and  ultimate  regulator  of 
the  relative  value  of  any  two  commodities  is  the  cost  of  their 
production,  and  not  the  respective  quantities  which  may  be 
produced,  nor  the  competition  amongst  the  purchasers. 

According  to  Adam  Smith,  the  colony  trade,  by  being  one  in 
which  British  capital  only  can  be  employed,  has  raised  the  rate 
of  profits  of  all  other  trades ;  and  as,  in  his  opinion,  high  profits, 
as  well  as  high  wages,  raise  the  prices  of  commodities,  the 
monopoly  of  the  colony  trade  has  been,  he  thinks,  injurious  to 
the  mother  country;  as  it  has  diminished  her  power  of  selling 
manufactured  commodities  as  cheap  as  other  countries.     He 


232  Political  Economy 

says  that  "  in  consequence  of  the  monopoly,  the  increase  of 
the  colony  trade  has  not  so  much  occasioned  an  addition  to  the 
trade  which  Great  Britain  had  before  as  a  total  change  in  its 
direction.  Secondly,  this  monopoly  has  necessarily  contributed 
to  keep  up  the  rate  of  profit  in  all  the  different  branches  of 
British  trade  higher  than  it  naturally  would  have  been  had 
all  nations  been  allowed  a  free  trade  to  the  Brilish  colonies." 
"  But  whatever  raises  in  any  country  the  ordinary  rate  of  profit 
higher  than  it  otherwise  would  be,  necessarily  subjects  that 
country  both  to  an  absolute  and  to  a  relative  disadvantage  in 
every  branch  of  trade  of  which  she  has  not  the  monopoly.  It 
subjects  her  to  an  absolute  disadvantage,  because  in  such 
branches  of  trade  her  merchants  cannot  get  this  greater  profit 
without  selling  dearer  than  tJiey  otherwise  would  do  both  the 
goods  of  foreign  countries  which  they  import  into  their  own 
and  the  goods  of  their  own  country  which  they  export  to  foreign 
countries.  Their  own  country  must  both  buy  dearer  and  sell 
dearer;  must  both  buy  less  and  sell  less;  must  both  enjoy  less 
and  produce  less  than  she  otherwise  would  do." 

"  Our  merchants  frequently  complain  of  the  high  wages  of 
British  labour  as  the  cause  of  their  manufactures  being  under- 
sold in  foreign  markets;  but  they  are  silent  about  the  high 
profits  of  stock.  They  complain  of  the  extravagant  gain  of 
other  people,  but  they  say  nothing  of  their  own.  The  high 
profits  of  British  stock,  however,  may  contribute  towards 
raising  the  price  of  British  manufacture  in  many  cases  as  much, 
and  in  some  perhaps  more,  than  tJie  high  wages  of  British 
labour." 

I  allow  that  the  monopoly  of  the  colony  trade  will  change,  and 
often  prejudicially,  the  direction  of  capital;  but  from  what 
I  have  already  said  on  the  subject  of  profits,  it  will  be  seen  that 
any  change  from  one  foreign  trade  to  another,  or  from  home 
to  foreign  trade,  cannot,  in  my  opinion,  affect  the  rate  of  profits. 
The  injury  suffered  will  be  what  I  have  just  described ;  there  will 
be  a  worse  distribution  of  the  general  capital  and  industry,  and, 
therefore,  less  will  be  produced.  The  natural  price  of  commo- 
dities will  be  raised,  and  therefore,  though  the  consumer  will 
be  able  to  purchase  to  the  same  money  value,  he  will  obtain 
a  less  quantity  of  commodities.  It  will  be  seen,  too,  that  if  it 
even  had  the  effect  of  raising  profits,  it  would  not  occasion  the 
least  alteration  in  prices;  prices  being  regulated  neither  by 
wages  nor  profits. 

And  does  not  Adam  Smith  agree  in  this  opinion,  when  he  says 


On  Colonial  Trade  233 

that  "  the  prices  of  commodities,  or  the  value  of  gold  and  silver 
as  compared  with  commodities,  depends  upon  the  proportion 
between  the  quantity  of  labour  which  is  necessary  in  order  to 
bring  a  certain  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  to  market,  and  that 
which  is  necessary  to  bring  thither  a  certain  quantity  of  any 
other  sort  of  goods?"  That  quantity  will  not  be  affected, 
whether  profits  be  high  or  low,  or  wages  low  or  high.  How  then 
can  prices  be  raised  by  high  profits  ? 


CHAPTER  XXVI 

ON   GROSS   AND   NET   REVENUE 

lDam  Smith  constantly  magnifies  the  advantages  which  a  country- 
derives  from  a  large  gross,  rather  than  a  large  net  income.  "  In 
proportion  as  a  greater  share  of  the  capital  of  a  country  is 
employed  in  agriculture,"  he  says,  **  the  greater  will  be  the 
quantity  of  productive  labour  which  it  puts  into  motion  within 
the  country;  as  will  likewise  be  the  value  which  its  employment 
adds  to  the  annual  produce  of  the  land  and  labour  of  the  society. 
After  agriculture,  the  capital  employed  in  manufactures  puts 
into  motion  the  greatest  quantity  of  productive  labour,  and  adds 
the  greatest  value  to  the  annual  produce.  That  which  is 
employed  in  the  trade  of  exportation  has  the  least  effect  of  any 
of  the  three."  ^ 

Granting,  for  a  moment,  that  this  were  true,  what  would  be 
the  advantage  resulting  to  a  country  from  the  employment  of 
a  great  quantity  of  productive  labour,  if,  whether  it  employed 
that  quantity  or  a  smaller,  its  net  rent  and  profits  together 
would  be  the  same.  The  whole  produce  of  the  land  and  labour 
of  every  country  is  divided  into  three  portions:  of  these,  one 
portion  is  devoted  to  wages,  another  to  profits,  and  the  other  to 
rent.  It  is  from  the  two  last  portions  only  that  any  deductions 
can  be  made  for  taxes  or  for  savings;  the  former,  if  moderate, 
constituting  always  the  necessary  expenses  of  production.*^ 
To  an  individual  with  a  capital  of  £20,000,  whose  profits  were 
£2000  per  annum,  it  would  be  a  matter  quite  indifferent  whether 

^  M.  Say  is  of  the  same  opinion  with  Adam  Smith :  "  The  most  productive 
employment  of  capital,  for  the  country  in  general,  after  that  on  the  land, 
is  that  of  manufactures  and  of  home  trade;  because  it  puts  in  activity 
an  industry  of  which  the  profits  are  gained  in  the  country,  while  those 
capitals  Avhich  are  employed  in  foreign  commerce  make  the  industry  and 
lands  of  all  countries  to  be  productive,  without  distinction. 

"  The  employment  of  capital  the  least  favourable  to  a  nation  is  that  of 
carrying  the  produce  of  one  foreign  country  to  another." — Say,  vol.  ii. 
p.  120. 

*  Perhaps  this  is  expressed  too  strongly,  as  more  is  generally  allotted  to 
the  labourer  under  the  name  of  wages  than  the  absolutely  necessary 
expenses  of  production.  In  that  case  a  part  of  the  net  produce  of  the 
country  is  received  by  the  labourer,  and  may  be  saved  or  expended  by 
him;  or  it  may  enable  him  to  contribute  to  the  defence  of  the  country. 

234     . 


Gross  and  Net  Revenue  235 

his  capital  would  employ  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  men,  whether 
the  commodity  produced  sold  for  £10,000  or  for  £20,000, 
provided,  in  all  cases,  his  profits  were  not  diminished  below 
/2000.  Isnot  the  real  interest  of  the  nation  similar?  Provided 
its  net  real  income,  its  rent  and  profits  be  the  same,  it  is  of  no 
importance  whether  the  nation  consists  of  ten  or  of  twelve 
millions  of  inhabitants.  Its  power  of  supporting  fleets  and 
armies,  and  all  species  of  unproductive  labour,  must  be  in 
proportion  to  its  net,  and  not  in  proportion  to  its  gross,  income. 
If  five  millions  of  men  could  produce  as  much  food  and  clothing 
as  was  necessary  for  ten  millions,  food  and  clothing  for  five 
millions  would  be  the  net  revenue.  Would  it  be  of  any  advan- 
tage to  the  country  that,  to  produce  this  same  net  revenue, 
seven  millions  of  men  should  be  required,  that  is  to  say,  that 
seven  millions  should  be  employed  to  produce  food  and  clothing 
sufficient  for  twelve  millions?  The  food  and  clothing  of  five 
millions  would  be  still  the  net  revenue.  The  employing  a 
greater  number  of  men  would  enable  us  neither  to  add  a  man 
to  our  army  and  navy,  nor  to  contribute  one  guinea  more  in 
taxes. 

It  is  not  on  the  grounds  of  any  supposed  advantage  accruing 
from  a  large  population,  or  of  the  happiness  that  may  be  enjoyed 
by  a  greater  number  of  human  beings,  that  Adam  Smith  sup- 
ports the  preference  of  that  employment  of  capital  which  gives 
motion  to  the  greatest  quantity  of  industry,  but  expressly  on  the 
ground  of  its  increasing  the  power  of  the  country,^  for  he  says 
that  "  the  riches  and,  so  far  as  power  depends  upon  riches,  the 
power  of  every  country  must  always  be  in  proportion  to  the  value 
of  its  annual  produce,  the  fund  from  which  all  taxes  must 
ultimately  be  paid."  It  must,  however,  be  obvious  that  the 
power  of  paying  taxes  is  in  proportion  to  the  net,  and  not  in 
proportion  to  the  gross,  revenue. 

In  the  distribution  of  employments  amongst  all  countries,  the 
capital  of  poorer  nations  will  be  naturally  employed  in  those 
pursuits  wherein  a  great  quantity  of  labour  is  supported  at 
home,  because  in  such  countries  the  food  and  necessaries  for 
an  increasing  population  can  be  most  easily  procured.  In  rich 
countries,  on  the  contrary,  where  food  is  dear,  capital  will 
naturally  flow,  when  trade  is  free,  into  those  occupations  wherein 

^  M.  Say  has  totally  misunderstood  me  in  supposing  that  I  have  con- 
sidered as  nothing  the  happiness  of  so  many  human  beings.  I  think  the 
text  sufficiently  shows  that  I  was  confining  ray  remarks  to  the  particular 
grounds  on  which  Adam  Smith  had  rested  it. 


236  Political  Economy 


5 


the  least  quantity  of  labour  is  required  to  be  maintained  at  home? 
such  as  the  carrying  trade,  the  distant  foreign  trade,  and  trades 
where  expensive  machinery  is  required;  to  trades  where  profits 
are  in  proportion  to  the  capital,  and  not  in  proportion  to  the 
quantity  of  labour  employed.^ 

Although  I  admit  that,  from  the  nature  of  rent,  a  given 
capital  employed  in  agriculture,  on  any  but  the  land  last  culti- 
vated, puts  in  motion  a  greater  quantity  of  labour  than  an  equal 
capital  employed  in  manufactures  and  trade,  yet  I  cannot 
admit  that  there  is  any  difference  in  the  quantity  of  labour 
employed  by  a  capital  engaged  in  the  home  trade  and  an  equal 
capital  engaged  in  the  foreign  trade. 

"  The  capital  which  sends  Scotch  manufactures  to  London, 
and  brings  back  English  com  and  manufactures  to  Edinburgh," 
says  Adam  Smith,  ''  necessarily  replaces,  by  every  such  opera- 
tion, two  British  capitals  which  had  both  been  employed  in  the 
agriculture  or  manufactures  of  Great  Britain. 

"  The  capital  employed  in  purchasing  foreign  goods  for  home 
consumption,  when  this  purchase  is  made  with  the  produce  of 
domestic  industry,  replaces,  too,  by  every  such  operation,  two 
distinct  capitals ;  but  one  of  them  only  is  employed  in  support- 
ing domestic  industry.  The  capital  which  sends  British  goods 
to  Portugal,  and  brings  back  Portuguese  goods  to  Great  Britain, 
replaces,  by  every  such  operation,  only  one  British  capital,  the 
other  is  a  Portuguese  one.  Though  the  returns,  therefore,  of 
the  foreign  trade  of  consumption  should  be  as  quick  as  the  home 
trade,  the  capital  employed  in  it  will  give  but  one  half  th 
encouragement  to  the  industry  or  productive  labour  of  t 
country." 

This  argument  appears  to  me  to  be  fallacious ;  for  though  t 
capitals,  one  Portuguese  and  one  English,  be  employed,  as  DrJ 
Smith  supposes,  still  a  capital  will  be  employed  in  the  foreign 
trade  double  of  what  would  be  employed  in  the  home  trade. 
Suppose  that  Scotland  employs  a  capital  of  a  thousand  pounds 
in  making  linen,  which  she  exchanges  for  the  produce  of  a 
similar   capital   employed   in   making   silks   in   England,   two 

*  "  It  is  fortunate  that  the  natural  course  of  things  draws  capital,  not 
to  those  employments  where  the  greatest  profits  are  made,  but  to  those 
where  the  operation  is  most  profitable  to  the  community." — Vol.  ii.  p.  122. 
M.  Say  has  not  told  us  what  those  employments  are  which,  while  they  are 
the  most  profitable  to  the  individual,  are  not  the  most  profitable  to  the 
state.  If  countries  with  limited  capitals,  but  with  abundance  of  fertile 
land,  do  not  early  engage  in  foreign  trade,  the  reason  is,  because  it  is  less 
profitable  to  individuals,  and  therefore  also  less  profitable  to  the  state. 


me 
the^, 

I 


Gross  and  Net  Revenue 


237 


thousand  pounds  and  a  proportional  quantity  of  labour  will  be 
employed  by  the  two  countries.  Suppose  now  that  England 
discovers  that  she  can  import  more  linen  from  Germany  for  the 
silks  which  she  before  exported  to  Scotland,  and  that  Scotland 
discovers  that  she  can  obtain  more  silks  from  France  in  return 
for  her  linen  than  she  before  obtained  from  England,  will  not 
England  and  Scotland  immediately  cease  trading  with  each 
other,  and  will  not  the  home  trade  of  consumption  be  changed 
for  a  foreign  trade  of  consumption?  But  although  two  addi- 
tional capitals  will  enter  into  this  trade,  the  capital  of  Germany 
and  that  of  France,  will  not  the  same  amount  of  Scotch  and  of 
English  capital  continue  to  be  employed,  and  will  it  not  give 
motion  to  the  same  quantity  of  industry  as  when  it  was  engaged 
in  the  home  trade  ? 


CHAPTER  XXVII 

ON   CURRENCY   AND   BANKS 

So  much  has  already  been  written  on  currency  that  of  those 
who  give  their  attention  to  such  subjects  none  but  the  prejudiced 
are  ignorant  of  its  true  principles.  I  shall,  therefore,  take  only 
a  brief  survey  of  some  of  the  general  laws  which  regulate  its 
quantity  and  value. 

Gold  and  silver,  like  all  other  commodities,  are  valuable  only 
in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  produce 
them  and  bring  them  to  market.  Gold  is  about  fifteen  times 
dearer  than  silver,  not  because  there  is  a  greater  demand  for  it, 
nor  because  the  supply  of  silver  is  fifteen  times  greater  than 
that  of  gold,  but  solely  because  fifteen  times  the  quantity  of 
labour  is  necessary  to  procure  a  given  quantity  of  it. 

The  quantity  of  money  that  can  be  employed  in  a  country 
must  depend  on  its  value :  if  gold  alone  were  employed  for  the 
circulation  of  commodities,  a  quantity  would  be  required  one 
fifteenth  only  of  what  would  be  necessary  if  silver  were  made 
use  of  for  the  same  purpose. 

A  circulation  can  never  be  so  abundant  as  to  overflow ;  for  b; 
diminishing  its  value  in  the  same  proportion  you  will  increase 
its  quantity,  and  by  increasing  its  value,  diminish  its  quantity. 

While  the  state  coins  money,  and  charges  no  seignorage, 
money  will  be  of  the  same  value  as  any  other  piece  of  the  same 
metal  of  equal  weight  and  fineness;  but  if  the  state  charges  a 
seignorage  for  coinage,  the  coined  piece  of  money  will  generally 
exceed  the  value  of  the  uncoined  piece  of  metal  by  the  whole 
seignorage  charged,  because  it  will  require  a  greater  quantity 
of  labour,  or,  which  is  the  same  thing,  the  value  of  the  produce 
of  a  greater  quantity  of  labour,  to  procure  it. 

While  the  state  alone  coins,  there  can  be  no  limit  to  this 
charge  of  seignorage;  for  by  limiting  the  quantity  of  coin,  it 
can  be  raised  to  any  conceivable  value. 

It  is  on  this  principle  that  paper  money  circulates:  the  whole 
charge  for  paper  money  may  be  considered  as  seignorage. 
Though  it  has  no  intrinsic  value,  yet,  by  limiting  its  quantity, 
its  value  in  exchange  is  as  great  as  an  equal  denomination  of 


e 

H 


I 


r 


Currency  and  Banks  239 

^coin,  or  of  bullion  in  that  coin.  On  the  same  principle,  too, 
namely,  by  a  limitation  of  its  quantity,  a  debased  coin  would 
circulate  at  the  value  it  should  bear  if  it  were  of  the  legal  weight 
and  fineness,  and  not  at  the  value  of  the  quantity  of  metal 
which  it  actually  contained.  In  the  history  of  the  British 
coinage  we  find,  accordingly,  that  the  currency  was  never 
depreciated  in  the  same  proportion  that  it  was  debased;  the 
reason  of  which  was,  that  it  never  was  increased  in  quantity  in 
proportion  to  its  diminished  intrinsic  value.^ 

There  is  no  point  more  important  in  issuing  paper  money 
than  to  be  fully  impressed  with  the  effects  which  follow  from 
the  principle  of  limitation  of  quantity.  It  will  scarcely  be"| 
believed  fifty  years  hence  that  bank  directors  and  ministers  I 
gravely  contended  in  our  times,  both  in  Parliament  and  before 
committees  of  Parliament,  that  the  issues  of  notes  by  the  Bank 
of  England,  unchecked  by  any  power  in  the  holders  of  such 
not^  to  demand  in  exchange  either  specie  or  bullion,  had  not, 
nor  could  have,  any  effect  on  the  prices  of  commodities,  bullion, 
or  foreign  exchanges. 

After  the  establishment  of  banks,  the  state  has  not  the  sole 
power  of  coining  or  issuing  money.  The  currency  may  as  effec- 
tually be  increased  by  paper  as  by  coin ;  so  that  if  a  state  were 
to  debase  its  money,  and  limit  its  quantity,  it  could  not  support 
its  value,  because  the  banks  would  have  an  equal  power  of 
adding  to  the  whole  quantity  of  circulation. 

On  these  principles,  it  will  be  seen  that  it  is  not  necessary 
that  paper  money  should  be  payable  in  specie  to  secure  its  value; 
it  is  only  necessary  that  its  quantity  should  be  regulated  accord- 
ing to  the  value  of  the  metal  which  is  declared  to  be  the  standard. 
If  the  standard  were  gold  of  a  given  weight  and  fineness,  paper 
might  be  increased  with  every  fall  in  the  value  of  gold,  or,  which 
is  the  same  thing  in  its  effects,  with  every  rise  in  the  price  of 
goods. 

"  By  issuing  too  great  a  quantity  of  paper,"  says  Dr.  Smith, 
"  of  which  the  excess  was  continually  returning  in  order  to  be 
exchanged  for  gold  and  silver,  the  Bank  of  England  was,  for 
many  years  together,  obliged  to  coin  gold  to  the  extent  of 
between  eight  hundred  thousand  pounds  and  a  million  a  year, 
or,  at  an  average,  about  eight  hundred  and  fifty  thousand 
pounds.  For  this  great  coinage,  the  Bank,  in  consequence  of 
the  worn  and  degraded  state  into  which  the  gold  coin  had  fallen 

*  Whatever  I  say  of  gold  coin  is  equally  applicable  to  silver  coin ;  but  it 
is  not  necessary  to  mention  both  on  every  occasion. 


240  Political  Economy 

a  few  years  ago,  was  frequently  obliged  to  purchase  bullion  at 
the  high  price  of  four  pounds  an  ounce,  which  it  soon  after 
issued  in  coin  at  £3  lys.  lo^d.  an  ounce,  losing  in  this  manner 
between  two  and  a  half  and  three  per  cent,  upon  the  coinage  of 
so  very  large  a  sum.  Though  the  Bank,  therefore,  paid  no 
seignorage,  though  the  government  was  properly  at  the  expense 
of  the  coinage,  this  liberality  of  government  did  not  prevent 
altogether  the  expense  of  the  Bank." 

On  the  principle  above  stated,  it  appears  to  me  most  clear 
that  by  not  re-issuing  the  paper  thus  brought  in,  the  value  of 
the  whole  currency,  of  the  degraded  as  well  as  the  new  gold 
coin,  would  have  been  raised,  when  all  demands  on  the  Bank 
would  have  ceased. 

Mr.  Buchanan,  however,  is  not  of  this  opinion,  for  he  says 
*'  that  the  great  expense  to  which  the  Bank  was  at  this  time 
exposed  was  occasioned,  not  as  Dr.  Smith  seems  to  imagine,  by 
an  imprudent  issue  of  paper,  but  by  the  debased . state  of  the 
currency  and  the  consequent  high  price  of  bullion.  The  Bank, 
it  will  be  observed,  having  no  other  way  of  procuring  guineas 
but  by  sending  bullion  to  the  Mint  to  be  coined,  was  always 
forced  to  issue  new  coined  guineas  in  exchange  for  its  returned 
notes ;  and  when  the  currency  was  generally  deficient  in  weight, 
and  the  price  of  bullion  high  in  proportion,  it  became  profitable 
to  draw  these  heavy  guineas  from  the  bank  in  exchange  for  its 
paper;  to  convert  them  into  bullion,  and  to  sell  them  with  a 
profit  for  Bank  paper,  to  be  again  returned  to  the  Bank  for 
new  supply  of  guineas,  which  were  again  melted  and  sold, 
this  drain  of  specie  the  Bank  must  always  be  exposed  while 
currency  is  deficient  in  weight,  as  both  an  easy  and  a  certc 
profit  then  arises  from  the  constant  interchange  of  paper  f< 
specie.  It  may  be  remarked,  however,  that  to  whatever  incoi 
venience  and  expense  the  Bank  was  then  exposed  by  the  drain 
of  its  specie,  it  never  was  imagined  necessary  to  rescind  the 
obligation  to  pay  money  for  its  notes." 

Mr.  Buchanan  evidently  thinks  that  the  whole  currency  must 
necessarily  be  brought  down  to  the  level  of  the  value  of  the 
debased  pieces;  but  surely,  by  a  diminution  of  the  quantity  of 
the  currency,  the  whole  that  remains  can  be  elevated  to  the 
value  of  the  best  pieces. 

Dr.  Smith  appears  to  have  forgotten  his  own  principle  in  his 
argument  on  colony  currency.  Instead  of  ascribing  the  depre- 
ciation of  that  paper  to  its  too  great  abundance,  he  asks  whether, 
allowing  the  colony  security  to  be  perfectly  good,  a  hundred 


Currency  and  Banks  241 

pounds,  payable  fifteen  years  hence,  would  be  equally  valuable 
with  a  hundred  pounds  to  be  paid  immediately  ?  I  answer  yes, 
if  it  be  not  too  abundant. 

Experience,  however,  shows  that  neither  a  state  nor  a  bank' 
ever  have  had  the  unrestricted  power  of  issuing  paper  money 
without  abusing  that  power;  in  all  states,  therefore,  the  issue 
of  paper  money  ought  to  be  under  some  check  and  control ;  and 
none  seems  so  proper  for  that  purpose  as  that  of  subjecting  the 
issuers  of  paper  money  to  the  obligation  of  paying  their  notes 
either  in  gold  coin  or  bullion.  _ 

["  To  secure  the  public  ^  against  any  other  variations  in  the 
value  of  currency  than  those  to  which  the  standard  itself  is 
subject,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  carry  on  the  circulation  with 
a  medium  the  least  expensive,  is  to  attain  the  most  perfect  state 
to  which  a  currency  can  be  brought,  and  we  should  possess  all 
these  advantages  by  subjecting  the  Bank  to  the  deliver}'-  of 
uncoined  gold  or  silver  at  the  Mint  standard  and  price,  in  ex- 
change for  their  notes,  instead  of  the  delivery  of  guineas;  by 
which  means  paper  would  never  fall  below  the  value  of  bullion 
without  being  followed  by  a  reduction  of  its  quantity.  To 
prevent  the  rise  of  paper  above  the  value  of  bullion,  the  Bank 
should  be  also  obliged  to  give  their  paper  in  exchange  for  standard 
gold  at  the  price  of  £3  175.  per  ounce.  Not  to  give  too  much 
trouble  to  the  Bank,  the  quantity  of  gold  to  be  demanded  in 
exchange  for  paper  at  the  Mint  price  of  £3  175.  lo^d.,  or  the 
quantity  to  be  sold  to  the  Bank  at  £3  lys.,  should  never  be  less 
than  twenty  ounces.  In  other  words,  the  Bank  should  be 
obliged  to  purchase  any  quantity  of  gold  that  was  offered  them, 
not  less  than  twenty  ounces,  at  £$  175.2  per  ounce,  and  to  sell 
any  quantity  that  might  be  demanded  at  £3  175.  10^^.  While 
they  have  the  power  of  regulating  the  quantity  of  their  paper 
there  is  no  possible  inconvenience  that  could  result  to  them  from 
such  a  regulation. 

"  The  most  perfect  liberty  should  be  given,  at  the  same  time^ 
to  export  or  import  every  description  of  bullion.     These  trans- 

^  This,  and  the  following  paragraphs,  to  the  close  of  the  bracket,  p.  244, 
is  extracted  from  a  pamphlet  entitled  Proposals  for  an  Economical  and 
Secure  Currency,  published  by  the  author  in  the  year  1816. 

'The  price  of  £3  17s.  here  mentioned  is  of  course  an  arbitrary  price. 
There  might  be  good  reason,  perhaps,  for  fixing  it  either  a  little  above  or 
a  little  below.  In  naming  £3  17s.,  I  wish  only  to  elucidate  the  principle. 
The  price  ought  to  be  so  fixed  as  to  make  it  the  interest  of  the  seller  of 
gold  rather  to  sell  it  to  the  Bank  than  to  carry  it  to  the  Mint  to  be  coined. 

The  same  remark  applies  to  the  specified  quantity  of  twenty  ounces. 
There  might  be  good  reason  for  making  it  ten  or  thirty. 

Q 


242  Political  Economy 

actions  in  bullion  would  be  very  few  in  number,  if  the  Bank 
regulated  their  loans  and  issues  of  paper  by  the  criterion  which 
I  have  so  often  mentioned,  namely,  the  price  of  standard 
bullion,  without  attending  to  the  absolute  quantity  of  paper 
in  circulation. 

"  The  object  which  I  have  in  view  would  be  in  a  great  measure 
attained  if  the  Bank  were  obliged  to  deliver  uncoined  bullion, 
in  exchange  for  their  notes,  at  the  Mint  price  and  standard, 
though  they  were  not  under  the  necessity  of  purchasing  any 
quantity  of  bullion  offered  them  at  the  prices  to  be  fixed,  par- 
ticularly if  the  Mint  were  to  continue  open  to  the  public  for  the 
coinage  of  money;  for  that  regulation  is  merely  suggested  to 
prevent  the  value  of  money  from  varying  from  the  value  of 
bullion  more  than  the  trifling  difference .  between  the  prices 
at  which  the  Bank  should  buy  and  sell,  and  which  would  be 
an  approximation  to  that  uniformity  in  its  value  which  is 
acknowledged  to  be  so  desirable. 

"  If  the  Bank  capriciously  limited  the  quantity  of  their  paper 
they  would  raise  its  value,  and  gold  might  appear  to  fall  below 
the  limits  at  which  I  propose  the  Bank  should  purchase.  Gold, 
in  that  case,  might  be  carried  to  the  Mint,  and  the  money 
returned  from  thence,  being  added  to  the  circulation,  would  have 
the  effect  of  lowering  its  value,  and  making  it  again  confonn  to 
the  standard ;  but  it  would  neither  be  done  so  safely,  so  economi- 
cally, nor  so  expeditiously  as  by  the  means  which  I  have  pro- 
posed, against  wliich  the  Bank  can  have  no  objection  to  offer, 
as  it  is  for  their  interest  to  furnish  the  circulation  with  paper 
rather  than  oblige  others  to  furnish  it  with  coin. 

"  Under  such  a  system,  and  with  a  currency  so  regulated,  the 
bank  would  never  be  liable  to  any  embarrassments  whatever, 
excepting  on  those  extraordinary  occasions  when  a  general  panic 
seizes  the  country,  and  when  every  one  is  desirous  of  possessing 
the  precious  metals  as  the  most  convenient  mode  of  realising  or 
concealing  his  property.  Against  such  panics  banks  have  no 
security  on  any  system  ;  from  their  very  nature  they  are  subject 
to  them,  as  at  no  time  can  there  be  in  a  bank,  or  in  a  country', 
so  much  specie  or  bullion  as  the  moneyed  individuals  of  such 
country  have  a  right  to  demand.  Should  every  man  withdraw 
his  balance  from  his  banker  on  the  same  day,  many  times  the 
quantity  of  bank  notes  now  in  circulation  would  be  insufficient 
to  answer  such  a  demand.  A  panic  of  this  kind  was  the  cause 
of  the  crisis  in  17Q7;  and  not,  as  has  been  supposed,  the  large 
advances  which  the  Bank  had  then  made  to  government.  Neither 


Currency  and  Banks  243 

the  Bank  nor  government  were  at  that  time  to  blame;  it  was 
the  contagion  of  the  unfounded  fears  of  the  timid  part  of  the 
community  which  occasioned  the  run  on  the  Bank^  and  it  would 
equally  have  taken  place  if  they  had  not  made  any  advances  to 
government  and  had  possessed  twice  their  present  capital. 
If_the  Bank  had  continued_paying  in  cash,  probably JhepaniQ 
jvouldliave  subsided  before^theiflc^^  exhausted- 

"  With  the^  knowiTopinion  of  the  Bank  directors  as  to  the  rule 
for  issuing  paper  money,  they  may  be  said  to  have  exercised 
their  powers  without  any  great  indiscretion.  It  is  evident  that 
they  have  followed  their  own  principle  with  extreme  caution. 
In  the  present  state  of  the  law,  they  have  the  power,  without 
any  control  whatever,  of  increasing  or  reducing  the  circulation 
in  any  degree  they  may  think  proper;  a  power  which  should 
neither  be  entrusted  to  the  state  itself,  nor  to  anybody  in  it,  as 
there  can  be  no  security  for  the  uniformity  in  the  value  of  the 
currency  when  its  augmentation  or  diminution  depends  solely 
on  the  will  of  the  issuers.  That  the  Bank  have  the  power  of 
reducing  the  circulation  to  the  very  narrowest  limits  will  not 
be  denied,  even  by  those  who  agree  in  opinion  with  the  directors 
that  they  have  not  the  power  of  adding  indefinitely  to  its  quan- 
tity. Though  I  am  fully  assured  that  it  is  both  against  the 
interest  and  the  wish  of  the  Bank  to  exercise  this  power  to  the 
detriment  of  the  public,  yet,  when  I  contemplate  the  evil  con- 
sequences which  might  ensue  from  a  sudden  and  great  reduction 
of  the  circulation,  as  well  as  from  a  great  addition  to  it,  I  cannot 
but  deprecate  the  facility  with  which  the  state  has  armed  the 
Bank  with  so  formidable  a  prerogative. 

"  The  inconvenience  to  which  country  banks  were  subjected 
before  the  restriction  on  cash  payments  must  at  times  have 
been  very  great.  At  all  periods  of  alarm,  or  of  expected  alarm, 
they  must  have  been  under  the  necessity  of  providing  them- 
selves with  guineas,  that  they  might  be  prepared  for  every 
exigency  which  might  occur.  Guineas,  on  these  occasions,  were 
obtained  at  the  Bank  in  exchange  for  the  larger  notes,  and  were 
conveyed  by  some  confidential  agent,  at  expense  and  risk,  to 
the  country  bank.  After  performing  the  offices  to  which  they 
were  destined,  they  found  their  way  again  to  London,  and  in 
all  probability  were  again  lodged  in  the  Bank,  provided  they  had 
not  suffered  such  a  loss  of  weight  as  to  reduce  them  below  the 
legal  standard. 

"  If  the  plan  now  proposed  of  paying  bank  notes  in  bullion 
be  adopted,  it  would  be  necessary  either  to  extend  the  same 


244  Political  Economy 


1 


privilege  to  country  banks,  or  to  make  bank  notes  a  legal'tender, 
in  which  latter  case  there  would  be  no  alteration  in  the  law 
respecting  country  banks,  as  they  would  be  required,  precisely 
as  they  now  are,  to  pay  their  notes  when  demanded  in  Bank 
of  England  notes. 

"  The  saving  which  would  take  place  from  not  submitting  the 
guineas  to  the  loss  of  weight  from  the  friction  which  they  must 
undergo  in  their  repeated  journeys,  as  well  as  of  the  expenses  of 
conveyance,  would  be  considerable;  but  by  far  the  greatest 
advantage  would  result  from  the  permanent  supply  of  the  country 
as  well  as  of  the  London  circulation,  as  far  as  the  smaller  pay- 
ments are  concerned,  being  provided  in  the  very  cheap  medium 
paper,  instead  of  the  very  valuable  medium,  gold;  thereby 
enabling  the  country  to  derive  all  the  profit  which  may  be 
obtained  by  the  productive  employment  of  a  capital  to  that 
amount.  We  should  surely  not  be  justified  in  rejecting  so 
decided  a  benefit  unless  some  specific  inconvenience  could  be 
pointed  out  as  likely  to  follow  from  adopting  the  cheaper 
medium."] 

A  currency  is  in  its  most  perfect  state  when  it  consists  wholly 
of  paper  money,  but  of  paper  money  of  an  equal  value  with  the 
gold  which  it  professes  to  represent.  The  use  of  paper  instead 
of  gold  substitutes  the  cheapest  in  place  of  the  most  expensive 
medium,  and  enables  the  country,  without  loss  to  any  individual, 
to  exchange  all  the  gold  which  it  before  used  for  this  purpose 
for  raw  materials,  utensils,  and  food;  by  the  use  of  which  both 
its  wealth  and  its  enjoyments  are  increased. 

In  a  national  point  of  view,  it  is  of  no  importance  whether  the 
issuers  of  this  well  regulated  paper  money  be  the  government 
or  a  bank,  it  will,  on  the  whole,  be  equally  productive  of  riches 
whether  it  be  issued  by  one  or  by  the  other;  but  it  is  not  so 
with  respect  to  the  interest  of  individuals.  In  a  country  where 
the  market  rate  of  interest  is  7  per  cent.,  and  where  the  state 
requires  for  a  particular  expense  £70,000  per  annum,  it  is  a 
question  of  importance  to  the  individuals  of  that  country 
whether  they  must  be  taxed  to  pay  this  £70,000  per  annum,  or 
whether  they  could  raise  it  without  taxes.  Suppose  that  a 
million  of  money  should  be  required  to  fit  out  an  expedition. 
If  the  state  issued  a  million  of  paper  and  displaced  a  million  of 
coin,  the  expedition  would  be  fitted  out  without  any  charge  to 
the  people;  but  if  a  bank  issued  a  million  of  paper,  and  lent  it 
to  government  at  7  per  cent.,  thereby  displacing  a  million  of 
coin,  the  country  would  be  charged  with  a  continual  tax  of 


Currency  and  Banks  245 

3^70,000  per  annum:  the  people  would  pay  the  tax,  the  bank 
would  receive  it,  and  the  society  would  in  either  case  be  as 
wealthy  as  before;  the  expedition  would  have  been  really  fitted 
out  by  the  improvement  of  our  system,  by  rendering  capital  of 
the  value  of  a  million  productive  in  the  form  of  commodities 
instead  of  letting  it  remain  unproductive  in  the  form  of  coin; 
but  the  advantage  would  always  be  in  favour  of  the  issuers  of 
paper;  and  as  the  state  represents  the  people,  the  people  would 
have  saved  the  tax  if  they,  and  not  the  bank,  had  issued  this 
million. 

I  have  already  observed  that  if  there  were  perfect  security 
that  the  power  of  issuing  paper  money  would  not  be  abused,  it 
would  be  of  no  importance  with  respect  to  the  riches  of  the 
country  collectively  by  whom  it  was  issued;  and  I  have  now 
shown  that  the  public  would  have  a  direct  interest  that  the 
issuers  should  be  the  state,  and  not  a  company  of  merchants  or 
bankers.  The  danger,  however,  is  that  this  power  would  be 
more  likely  to  be  abused  if  in  the  hands  of  government  than  if 
in  the  hands  of  a  banking  company.  A  company  would,  it  is 
said,  be  more  under  the  control  of  law,  and  although  it  might 
be  their  interest  to  extend  their  issues  beyond  the  bounds  of 
discretion,  they  would  be  limited  and  checked  by  the  power 
which  individuals  would  have  of  calling  for  bullion  or  specie. 
It  is  argued  that  the  same  check  would  not  be  long  respected 
if  government  had  the  privilege  of  issuing  money;  that  they 
would  be  too  apt  to  consider  present  convenience  rather  than 
future  security,  and  might,  therefore,  on  the  alleged  grounds  of 
expediency,  be  too  much  inclined  to  remove  the  checks  by 
which  the  amount  of  their  issues  was  controlled. 

Under  an  arbitrary  government  this  objection  would  have 
great  force;  but  in  a  free  country,  with  an  enlightened  legis- 
lature, the  power  of  issuing  paper  money,  under  the  requisite 
checks  of  convertibility  at  the  will  of  the  holder,  might  be 
safely  lodged  in  the  hands  of  commissioners  appointed  for  that 
special  purpose,  and  they  might  be  made  totally  independent 
of  the  control  of  ministers. 

The  sinking  fund  is  managed  by  commissioners  responsible 
only  to  Parliament,  and  the  investment  of  the  money  entrusted 
to  their  charge  proceeds  with  the  utmost  regularity;  what 
reason  can  there  be  to  doubt  that  the  issues  of  paper  money 
might  be  regulated  with  equal  fidelity,  if  placed  under  similar 
management.^ 

It  may  be  said  that  although  the  advantage  accruing  to  the 


246  Political  Economy 

state,  and,  therefore,  to  the  public,  from  issuing  paper  money 
is  sufficiently  manifest,  as  it  would  exchange  a  portion  of  the 
national  debt,  on  which  interest  is  paid  by  the  public,  into  a 
debt  bearing  no  interest:  yet  it  would  be  disadvantageous  to 
commerce,  as  it  would  preclude  the  merchants  from  borrowing 
money  and  getting  their  bills  discounted,  the  method  in  which 
bank  paper  is  partly  issued. 

This,  however,  is  to  suppose  that  money  could  not  be  bor- 
rowed if  the  Bank  did  not  lend  it,  and  that  the  market  rate  of 
interest  and  profit  depends  on  the  amount  of  the  issues  of 
money  and  on  the  channel  through  which  it  is  issued.  But  as 
a  country  would  have  no  deficiency  of  cloth,  of  wine,  or  any 
other  commodity,  if  they  had  the  means  of  paying  for  it,  in  the 
same  manner  neither  would  there  be  any  deficiency  of  money 
to  be  lent  if  the  borrowers  offered  good  security  and  were 
willing  to  pay  the  market  rate  of  interest  for  it. 

In  another  part  of  this  work  I  have  endeavoured  to  show 
that  the  real  value  of  a  commodity  is  regulated,  not  by  tlie 
accidental  advantages  which  may  be  enjoyed  by  some  of  its 
producers,  but  by  the  real  difficulties  encountered  by  that 
producer  who  is  least  favoured.  It  is  so  with  respect  to  the 
interest  for  money ;  it  is  not  regulated  by  the  rate  at  which  the 
bank  will  lend,  whether  it  be  5, 4,  or  3  per  cent.,  but  by  the  rate 
of  profits  which  can  be  made  by  the  employment  of  capital,  and 
which  is  totally  independent  of  the  quantity  or  of  the  value  of 
money.  Whether  a  bank  lent  one  million,  ten  million,  or  a 
hundred  millions,  they  would  not  permanently  alter  tJie  market 
rate  of  interest;  they  would  alter  only  the  value  of  the  money 
which  they  thus  issued.  In  one  case,  ten  or  twenty  times  more 
money  might  be  required  to  carry  on  the  same  business  than 
what  might  be  required  in  the  other.  The  applications  to  the 
bank  for  money,  then,  depend  on  the  comparison  between  the 
rate  of  profits  that  may  be  made  by  the  emploj-ment  of  it  and 
the  rate  at  which  they  are  willing  to  lend  it  Hthej^^hargejess^ 
than  the  roarkpt._nitC  nf-interc5;t^^therejs  rr>  ajnn^jnrT^m^npjir- 
jiijJ2Jr.h  thpy  might  not  \pn(]i  if  they  charge  more  than  that 
^rate  none  but  spendthrifts  and  prodigals  would  be  found  to 
borrow  of  them.  We  accordingly  find  that  when  the  market 
rate  of  interest  exceeds  the  rate  of  5  per  cent,  at  which  the  Bank 
uniformly  lend,  the  discount  office  is  besieged  witli  applicants 
for  money;  and,  on  the  contrary,  when  the  market  rate  is  even 

L  temporarily  under  5  per  cent.,  the  clerks  of  that  office  have  no 
employment. 


Currency  and  Banks  247 

The  reason,  then,  why  for  the  last  twenty  years  the  Bank  is 
said  to  have  given  so  much  aid  to  commerce,  by  assisting  the 
merchants  with  money,  is  because  they  have,  during  that  whole 
period,  lent  money  below  the  market  rate  of  interest;  below 
that  rate  at  which  the  merchants  could  have  borrowed  elsewhere; 
but  I  confess  that  to  me  this  seems  rather  an  objection  to  their 
establishment  than  an  argument  in  favour  of  it. 

What  should  we  say  of  an  establishment  which  should  regu- 
larly supply  half  the  clothiers  with  wool  under  the  market  price? 
Of  what  benefit  would  it  be  to  the  community?  It  would  not 
extend  our  trade,  because  the  wool  would  equally  have  been 
bought  if  they  had  charged  the  market  price  for  it.  It  would 
not  lower  the  price  of  cloth  to  the  consumer,  because  the  price, 
as  I  have  said  before,  would  be  regulated  by  the  cost  of  its 
production  to  those  who  were  the  least  favoured.  Its  sole 
effect,  then,  would  be  to  swell  the  profits  of  a  part  of  the  clothiers 
beyond  the  general  and  common  rate  of  profits.  The  establish- 
ment would  be  deprived  of  its  fair  profits,  and  another  part  of  the 
community  would  be  in  the  same  degree  benefited.  Now,  this^ 
is  precisely  the  effect  of  our  banking  establishments ;  a  rate  of 
interest  is  fixed  by  the  law  below  that  at  which  it  can  be  borrowed  I 
in  the  market,  and  at  this  rate  the  Bank  are  required  to  lend  or  I 
not  to  lend  at  all.  From  the  nature  of  their  establishment,  they 
have  large  funds  which  they  can  only  dispose  of  in  this  way; 
and  a  part  of  the  traders  of  the  country  are  unfairly,  and,  for 
the  country,  unprofitably  benefited,  by  being  enabled  to  supply 
themselves  with  an  instrument  of  trade  at  a  less  charge  than 
those  who  must  be  influenced  only  by  a  market  price. 

The  whole  business  which  tJie  whole  community  can  carry  on 
depends  on  the  quantity  of  its  capital,  that  is,  of  its  raw  material, 
machinery,  food,  vessels,  etc.,  employed  in  production.  After 
a  well  regulated  paper  money  is  established,  these  can  neither 
be  increased  nor  diminished  by  the  operations  of  banking.  If, 
then,  the  state  were  to  issue  the  paper  money  of  the  country, 
although  it  should  never  discount  a  bill,  or  lend  one  shilling  to 
the  public,  there  would  be  no  alteration  in  tlie  amount  of  trade; 
for  we  should  have  the  same  quantity  of  raw  materials,  of 
machinery,  food,  and  ships;  and  it  is  probable,  too,  that  the*" 
same  amount  of  money  might  be  lent,  not  always  at  5  per  cent., 
indeed,  a  rate  fixed  by  law,  when  that  might  be  under  the 
market  rate,  but  at  6,  7,  or  8  per  cent.,  the  result  of  the  fair 
competition  in  the  market  between  the  lenders  and  the 
borrowers. 


248  Political  Economy 

Adam  Smith  speaks  of  the  advantages  derived  by  merchants 
from  the  superiority  of  the  Scotch  mode  of  affording  accom- 
modation to  trade  over  the  EngHsh  mode,  by  means  of  cash 
accounts.  These  cash  accounts  are  credits  given  by  the  Scotch 
banker  to  his  customers,  in  addition  to  the  bills  which  he  dis- 
counts for  them ;  but  as  the  banker,  in  proportion  as  he  advances 
money  and  sends  it  into  circulation  in  one  way,  is  debarred  from 
issuing  so  much  in  the  other,  it  is  difficult  to  perceive  in  what 
the  advantage  consists.  If  the  whole  circulation  will  bear  only 
one  million  of  paper,  one  million  only  will  be  circulated;  and  it 
can  be  of  no  real  importance  either  to  the  banker  or  merchant 
whether  the  whole  be  issued  in  discounting  bills,  or  a  part  be  so 
issued,  and  the  remainder  be  issued  by  means  of  tiiese  cash 
accounts. 

It  may  perhaps  be  necessary  to  say  a  few  words  on  the  subject 
of  the  two  metals,  gold  and  silver,  which  are  employed  in 
currency,  particularly  as  this  question  appears  to  perplex,  in 
many  people's  minds,  the  plain  and  simple  principles  of  cur- 
rency. "  In  England,"  says  Dr.  Smith,  *'  gold  was  not  con- 
sidered as  a  legal  tender  for  a  long  time  after  it  was  coined  into 
money.  The  proportion  between  the  values  of  gold  and  silver 
money  was  not  fixed  by  any  public  law  or  proclamation,  but  was 
left  to  be  settled  by  the  market.  If  a  debtor  offered  payment 
in  gold,  the  creditor  might  either  reject  such  pa>Tnent  alto- 
gether, or  accept  of  it  at  such  a  valuation  of  the  gold  as  he  and 
his  debtor  could  agree  upon." 

In  this  state  of  things  it  is  evident  that  a  guinea  might  some- 
times pass  for  225.  or  more,  and  sometimes  for  185.  or  less, 
depending  entirely  on  the  alteration  in  the  relative  market 
value  of  gold  and  silver.  All  the  variations,  too,  in  the  value 
of  gold,  as  well  as  in  the  value  of  silver,  would  be  rated  in  the 
gold  coin — it  would  appear  as  if  silver  was  invariable,  and  as 
if  gold  only  was  subject  to  rise  and  fall.  Thus,  although  a  guinea 
passed  for  22s.  instead  of  iSs.,  gold  might  not  have  varied  in 
value;  the  variation  might  have  been  wholly  confined  to  the 
silver,  and  therefore  22s.  might  have  been  of  no  more  value  than 
185.  were  before.  And,  on  the  contrary,  the  whole  variation 
might  have  been  in  the  gold;  a  guinea  which  was  worth  iSs. 
might  have  risen  to  the  value  of  225. 

If,  now,  we  suppose  this  silver  currency  to  be  debased  by 
clipping,  and  also  increased  in  quantity,  a  guinea  might  pass 
for  305. ;  for  the  silver  in  305.  of  such  debased  money  might  be 
of  no  more  value  than  the  gold  in  one  guinea.     By  restoring  tlie 


Currency  and  Banks  249 

silver  currency  to  its  Mint  value,  silver  money  would  rise;  but 
it  would  appear  as  if  gold  fell,  for  a  guinea  would  probably  be 
of  no  more  value  than  21  of  such  good  shillings. 

If  now  gold  be  also  made  a  legal  tender,  and  every  debtor  be 
at  liberty  to  discharge  a  debt  by  the  payment  of  420  shillings, 
or  twenty  guineas  for  every  £21  that  he  owes,  he  will  pay  in  one 
or  the  other  according  as  he  can  most  cheaply  discharge  his 
debt.  If  with  five  quarters  of  wheat  he  can  procure  as  much 
gold  bullion  as  the  Mint  will  coin  into  twenty  guineas,  and  for 
the  same  wheat  as  much  silver  bullion  as  the  Mint  will  coin  for 
him  into  430  shillings,  he  will  prefer  paying  in  silver,  because 
he  would  be  a  gainer  of  ten  shillings  by  so  paying  his  debt.  But 
if,  on  the  contrary,  he  could  obtain  with  this  wheat  as  much 
gold  as  would  be  coined  into  twenty  guineas  and  a  half,  and  as 
much  silver  only  as  would  coin  into  420  shillings,  he  would 
naturally  prefer  paying  his  debt  in  gold.  If  the  quantity  of 
gold  which  he  could  procure  could  be  coined  only  into  twenty 
guineas,  and  the  quantity  of  silver  into  420  shillings,  it  would 
be  a  matter  of  perfect  indifference  to  him  in  which  money, 
silver  or  gold,  it  was  that  he  paid  his  debt.  It  is  not,  then,  a 
matter  of  chance;  it  is  not  because  gold  is  better  fitted  for 
carrying  on  the  circulation  of  a  rich  country  that  gold  is  ever 
preferred  for  the  purpose  of  paying  debts,  but  simply  because 
it  is  the  interest  of  the  debtor  so  to  pay  them. 

During  a  long  period  previous  to  1797,  the  year  of  the  restric- 
tion on  the  Bank  payments  in  coin,  gold  was  so  cheap,  compared 
with  silver,  that  it  suited  the  Bank  of  England,  and  all  other 
debtors,  to  purchase  gold  in  the  market,  and  not  silver,  for  the 
purpose  of  carrying  it  to  the  Mint  to  be  coined,  as  they  could  in 
that  coined  metal  more  cheaply  discharge  their  debts.  The 
silver  currency  was,  during  a  great  part  of  this  period,  very 
much  debased;  but  it  existed  in  a  degree  of  scarcity,  and 
therefore,  on  the  principle  which  I  have  before  explained,  it 
never  sunk  in  its  current  value.  Though  so  debased,  it  was 
still  the  interest  of  debtors  to  pay  in  the  gold  coin.  If,  indeed^ 
the  quantity  of  this  debased  silver  coin  had  been  enormously 
great,  or  if  the  Mint  had  issued  such  debased  pieces,  it  might 
have  been  the  interest  of  debtors  to  pay  in  this  debased 
money;  but  its  quantity  was  limited,  and  it  sustained  its  value, 
and,  therefore,  gold  was  in  practice  the  real  standard  of 
currency. 

That  it  was  so  is  nowhere  denied ;  but  it  has  been  contended 
that  it  was  made  so  by  the  law,  which  declared  that  silver  should 


1 


250  Political  Economy 

not  be  a  legal  tender  for  any  debt  exceeding  £25,  unless  by 
weight,  according  to  the  Mint  standard. 

But  this  law  did  not  prevent  any  debtor  from  paying  his  debt, 
however  large  its  amount,  in  silver  currency  fresh  from  the 
Mint;  that  the  debtor  did  not  pay  in  this  metal  was  not  a 
matter  of  chance  nor  a  matter  of  compulsion,  but  wholly  the 
effect  of  choice;  it  did  not  suit  him  to  take  silver  to  the  Mint, 
it  did  suit  him  to  take  gold  thither.  It  is  probable  that  if  the 
quantity  of  this  debased  silver  in  circulation  had  been  enor- 
mously great,  and  also  a  legal  tender,  that  a  guinea  would  have 
been  again  worth  thirty  shillings;  but  it  would  have  been  the 
debased  shilling  that  would  have  fallen  in  value,  and  not  the 
guinea  that  had  risen. 

It  appears,  then,  that  whilst  each  of  the  two  metals  was 
equally  a  legal  tender  for  debts  of  any  amount,  we  were  subject 
to  a  constant  change  in  the  principal  standard  measure  of  value. 
It  would  sometimes  be  gold,  sometimes  silver,  depending 
entirely  on  the  variations  in  the  relative  value  of  the  two  metals ; 
and  at  such  times  the  metal  which  was  not  the  standard  would 
be  melted  and  withdrawn  from  circulation,  as  its  value  would 
be  greater  in  bullion  than  in  coin.  This  was  an  inconvenience 
which  it  was  highly  desirable  should  be  remedied;  but  so  slow 
is  the  progress  of  improvement  that,  although  it  had  been 
unanswerably  demonstrated  by  Mr.  Locke,  and  had  been 
noticed  by  all  writers  on  the  subject  of  money  since  his  day, 
a  better  system  was  never  adopted  till  the  session  of  Parliament 
i8i6,  when  it  was  enacted  that  gold  only  should  be  a  legal 
tender  for  any  sum  exceeding  forty  shillings. 

Dr.  Smith  does  not  appear  to  have  been  quite  aware  of  the 
eflFect  of  employing  two  metals  as  currency,  and  both  a  legal 
tender  for  debts  of  any  amount;  for  he  says  that  "  in  reality, 
during  the  continuance  of  any  one  regulated  proportion  between 
the  respective  values  of  the  different  metals  in  coin,  the  value 
of  the  most  precious  metal  regulates  the  value  of  the  whole  coin." 
Because  gold  was  in  his  day  the  medium  in  which  it  suited 
debtors  to  pay  their  debts,  he  thought  that  it  had  some  inherent 
quality  by  which  it  did  then,  and  always  would,  regulate  the 
value  of  silver  coin. 

On  the  reformation  of  the  gold  coin  in  1774,  a  new  guinea 
fresh  from  the  Mint  would  exchange  for  only  twenty-one  debased 
shillings;  but  in  the  reign  of  King  William,  when  the  silver 
coin  was  in  precisely  the  same  condition,  a  guinea  also  new  and 
fresh  from  the  Mint  would  exchange  for  thirty  shillings.    On 


Currency  and  Banks  251 

this  Mr.  Buchanan  observes,  "  here,  then,  is  a  most  singular 
fact,  of  which  the  common  theories  of  currency  offer  no  account; 
the  guinea  exchanging  at  one  time  for  thirty  shillings,  its 
intrinsic  worth  in  a  debased  silver  currency,  and  afterwards  the 
same  guinea  exchanged  for  only  twenty-one  of  those  debased 
shillings.  It  is  clear  that  some  great  change  must  have  inter- 
vened in  the  state  of  the  currency  between  these  two  different 
periods,  of  which  Dr.  Smith's  hypothesis  offers  no  explanation." 
It  appears  to  me  that  the  difficulty  may  be  very  simply  solved 
by  rejerring  this  different  state  n^  ^^^  v^lll^j  t^'*_£^""^"  gj-irh^ 
two  periods  mentioned  to  the  dig^^gpt  quantittfi.i^(ri_dehase.c{ 
^ttv^iT^^iTen^yin  circulation.  In  King  William's  reigngoff 
was~iiot"a~!egal  tender;  it  passed  only  at  a  conventional  value. 
All  the  large  payments  were  probably  made  in  silver,  particu- 
larly as  paper  currency  and  the  operations  of  banking  were  then 
little  understood.  The  quantity  of  this  debased  silver  money 
exceeded  the  quantity  of  silver  money  which  would  have  been 
maintained  in  circulation  if  nothing  but  undebased  money  had 
been  in  use;  and,  consequently,  it  was  depreciated  as  well  as 
debased.  But  in  the  succeeding  period,  when  gold  was  a  legal 
tender,  when  bank  notes  also  were  used  in  effecting  payments, 
the  quantity  of  debased  silver  money  did  not  exceed  the  quantity 
of  silver  coin  fresh  from  the  Mint  which  would  have  circulated 
if  there  had  been  no  debased  silver  money;  hence,  though  the 
money  was  debased  it  was  not  depreciated.  Mr.  Buchanan's 
explanation  is  somewhat  different;  he  thinks  that  a  subsidiary 
currency  is  not  liable  to  depreciation,  but  that  the  main  currency 
is.  In  King  William's  reign  silver  was  the  main  currency, 
and  hence  was  liable  to  depreciation.  In  1774  it  was  a  sub- 
sidiary currency,  and,  therefore,  maintained  its  value.  Depre- 
ciation, however,  does  not  depend  on  a  currency  being  the 
subsidiary  or  the  main  currency,  it  depends  wholly  on  its  being 
in  excess  of  quantity.^ 

*  It  has  lately  been  contended  in  Parliament  by  Lord  Lauderdale  that, 
Mrith  the  existing  Mint  regulation,  the  Bank  could  not  pay  their  notes  in 
specie,  because  the  relative  value  of  the  two  metals  is  such  that  it  would 
be  for  the  interest  of  all  debtors  to  pay  their  debts  with  silver  and  not 
with  gold  coin,  while  the  law  gives  a  power  to  all  the  creditors  of  the 
Bank  to  demand  gold  in  exchange  for  Bank  notes.  This  gold,  his  lordship 
thinks,  could  be  profitably  exported,  and  if  so,  he  contends  that  the  Bank, 
to  keep  a  supply,  will  be  obliged  to  buy  gold  constantly  at  a  premium 
and  sell  it  at  par.  If  every  other  debtor  could  pay  in  silver,  Lord  Lauder- 
dale would  be  right;  but  he  cannot  do  so  if  his  debt  exceed  405.  This, 
then,  would  limit  the  amount  of  silver  coin  in  circulation  (if  government 
had  not  reserved  to  itself  the  power  to  stop  the  coinage  of  that  metal 
whenever  they  might  think  it  expedient) ;  because  if  too  much  silver  were 


252  Political  Economy 

To  a  moderate  seignorage  on  the  coinage  of  money  there 
cannot  be  much  objection,  particularly  on  that  currency  which 
is  to  effect  the  smaller  payments.  Money  is  generally  enhanced 
in  value  to  the  full  amount  of  the  seignorage,  and,  therefore,  it 
is  a  tax  which  in  no  way  affects  those  who  pay  it,  while  the 
quantity  of  money  is  not  in  excess.  It  must,  however,  be 
remarked  that  in  a  country  where  a  paper  currency  is  estab- 
lished, although  the  issuers  of  such  paper  should  be  liable  to 
pay  it  in  specie  on  the  demand  of  the  holder,  still,  both  their 
notes  and  the  coin  might  be  depreciated  to  the  full  amount  of 
the  seignorage  on  that  coin,  which  is  alone  the  legal  tender, 
before  the  check,  which  limits  the  circulation  of  paper,  would 
operate.  If  the  seignorage  of  gold  coin  were  5  per  cent,  for 
instance,  the  currency,  by  an  abundant  issue  of  bank  notes, 
might  be  really  depreciated  5  per  cent,  before  it  would  be  the 
interest  of  the  holders  to  demand  coin  for  the  purpose  of  melting 
it  into  bullion;  a  depreciation  to  which  we  should  never  be 
exposed  if  either  there  was  no  seignorage  on  the  gold  coin  or, 
if  a  seignorage  were  allowed,  the  holders  of  hank  notes  might 
demand  bullion,  and  not  coin,  in  exchange  for  them,  at  the 
Mint  price  of  £3  175.  lo^d.  Unless,  then,  the  Bank  should  be 
obliged  to  pay  their  notes  in  bullion  or  coin,  at  the  will  of  the 
holder,  the  late  law  which  allows  a  seignorage  of  6  per  cent.,  or 
fourpence  per  oz.,  on  the  silver  coin,  but  which  directs  that  gold 
shall  be  coined  by  the  Mint  without  any  charge  whatever,  is 
perhaps  the  most  proper,  as  it  will  most  effectually  prevent  any 
unnecessary  variation  of  the  currency. 

coined  it  would  sink  in  relative  value  to  gold,  and  no  man  would  accept  it 
in  payment  for  a  debt  exceeding  40s.,  unless  a  compensation  were  made 
for  its  lower  value.  To  pay  a  debt  of  £100,  100  sovereigns,  or  bank  notes 
to  the  amount  of  £100,  would  be  necessary,  but  £105  in  silver  coin  might 
be  required  if  there  were  too  much  silver  in  circulation.  There  are,  then, 
two  checks  against  an  excessive  quantity  of  silver  coin;  first,  the  direct 
check  which  government  may  at  any  time  interpose  to  prevent  more  from 
being  coined;  secondly,  no  motive  of  interest  would  lead  any  one  to  take 
silver  to  the  Mint,  if  he  might  do  so,  for  if  it  were  coined,  it  would  not  pass 
current  at  its  Mint  but  only  at  its  market  value. 


I 
4 


CHAPTER  XXVIII 

ON  THE  COMPARATIVE  VALUE  OF  GOLD,  CORN,  AND  LABOUR 
IN  RICH  AND  POOR  COUNTRIES 

"  Gold  and  silver,  like  all  other  commodities,"  says  Adam 
Smith,  "  naturally  seek  the  market  where  the  best  price  is  given 
for  them;  and  the  best  price  is  commonly  given  for  everything 
in  the  country  which  can  best  afford  it.  Labour,  it  must  be 
remembered,  is  the  ultimate  price  which  is  paid  for  everything; 
and  in  countries  where  labour  is  equally  well  rewarded,  the 
money  price  of  labour  will  be  in  proportion  to  that  of  the  sub- 
sistence of  the  labourer.  But  gold  and  silver  will  naturally 
exchange  for  a  greater  quantity  of  subsistence  in  a  rich  than  in 
a  poor  country;  in  a  country  which  abounds  with  subsistence, 
than  in  one  which  is  but  indifferently  supplied  with  it." 

But  com  is  a  commodity,  as  well  as  gold,  silver,  and  other 
things ;  if  all  commodities,  therefore,  have  a  high  exchangeable 
value  in  a  rich  country,  com  must  not  be  excepted;  and  hence 
we  might  correctly  say  that  com  exchanged  for  a  great  deal  of 
money  because  it  was  dear,  and  that  money,  too,  exchanged 
for  a  great  deal  of  corn  because  that  also  was  dear;  which  is  to 
assert  that  corn  is  dear  and  cheap  at  the  same  time.  No  point 
in  political  economy  can  be  better  established  than  that  a  rich 
country  is  prevented  from  increasing  in  population,  in  the  same 
ratio  as  a  poor  country,  by  the  progressive  difficulty  of  providing 
food.  That  difficulty  must  necessarily  raise  the  relative  price 
of  food  and  give  encouragement  to  its  importation.  How  then 
can  money,  or  gold  and  silver,  exchange  for  more  corn  in  rich, 
than  in  poor,  countries  }  It  is  only  in  rich  countries,  where  corn 
is  dear,  that  landholders  induce  the  legislature  to  prohibit  the 
importation  of  com.  Who  ever  heard  of  a  law  to  prevent  the 
importation  of  raw  produce  in  America  or  Poland? — Nature 
has  effectually  precluded  its  importation  by  the  comparative 
facility  of  its  production  in  those  countries. 

How,  then,  can  it  be  tme  that,  "  if  you  except  corn,  and  such 
other  vegetables  as  are  raised  altogether  by  human  industry, 
all  other  sorts  of  mde  produce — cattle,  poultry,  game  of  all 
kinds,  the  useful  fossils  and  minerals  of  the  earth,  etc.,  naturally 

253 


2  54  Political  Economy 

grow  dearer  as  the  society  advances."  Why  should  com  and 
vegetables  alone  be  excepted?  Dr.  Smith's  error,  throughout 
his  whole  work,  lies  in  supposing  that  the  value  of  com  is 
constant;  that  though  the  value  of  all  other  things  may,  the 
value  of  com  never  can,  be  raised.  Com,  according  to  him, 
is  always  of  the  same  value,  because  it  will  always  feed  the  same 
number  of  people.  In  the  same  manner,  it  might  be  said  that 
cloth  is  always  of  the  same  value,  because  it  will  always  make 
the  same  number  of  coats.  What  can  value  have  to  do  with 
the  power  of  feeding  and  clothing? 

Com,  like  every  other  commodity,  has  in  every  country  its 
natural  price,  viz.  that  price  which  is  necessary  to  its  production, 
and  without  which  it  could  not  be  cultivated:  it  is  this  price 
which  govems  its  market  price,  and  which  determines  the 
expediency  of  exporting  it  to  foreign  countries.  If  the  impor- 
tation of  com  were  prohibited  in  England,  its  natural  price 
might  rise  to  £6  per  quarter  in  England,  whilst  it  was  only  at 
half  that  price  in  France.  If  at  this  time  the  prohibition  of 
importation  were  removed,  com  would  fall  in  the  English 
market,  not  to  a  price  between  £6  and  £3,  but  ultimately  and 
permanently  to  the  natural  price  of  France,  the  price  at  which 
it  could  be  furnished  to  the  English  market  and  afford  the  usual 
and  ordinary  profits  of  stock  in  France;  and  it  would  remain 
at  this  price  whether  England  consumed  a  hundred  thousand 
or  a  million  of  quarters.  If  the  demand  of  England  were  for 
the  latter  quantity,  it  is  probable  that,  owing  to  the  necessity 
under  which  France  would  be  of  having  recourse  to  land  of  a 
worse  quality,  to  furnish  this  large  supply,  the  natural  price 
would  rise  in  France;  and  this  would  of  course  affect  also  the 
price  of  com  in  England.  All  that  I  contend  for  is,  that  it  is 
the  natural  price  of  commodities  in  the  exporting  country 
which  ultimately  regulates  the  prices  at  which  they  shall  be  sold, 
if  they  are  not  the  objects  of  monopoly  in  the  importing  country. 

But  Dr.  Smith,  who  has  so  ably  supported  the  doctrine  of 
the  natural  price  of  commodities  ultimately  regulating  their 
market  price,  has  supposed  a  case  in  which  he  thinks  that  the 
market  price  would  not  be  regulated  either  by  the  natural  price 
of  the  exporting  or  of  the  importing  country.  "  Diminish  the 
real  opulence  either  of  Holland  or  the  territory  of  Genoa,"  he 
says,  "  while  the  number  of  their  inhabitants  remains  the  same; 
diminish  their  power  of  supplying  themselves  from  distant 
countries,  and  the  price  of  com,  instead  of  sinking  with  that 
diminution  in  the  quantity  of  their  silver  which  must  necessarily 


Comparative  Values  255 

accompany  this  declension,  either  as  its  cause  or  as  its  effect, 
will  rise  to  the  price  of  a  famine." 

To  me  it  appears  that  the  very  reverse  would  take  place:  the 
diminished  power  of  the  Dutch  or  Genoese  to  purchase  generally 
might  depress  the  price  of  corn  for  a  time  below  its  natural  price 
in  the  country  from  which  it  was  exported,  as  well  as  in  the 
countries  in  which  it  was  imported;  but  it  is  quite  impossible 
that  it  could  ever  raise  it  above  that  price.  It  is  only  by  increas- 
ing the  opulence  of  the  Dutch  and  Genoese  that  you  could 
increase  the  demand,  and  raise  the  price  of  com  above  its  former 
price;  and  that  would  take  place  only  for  a  very  limited  time, 
unless  new  difficulties  should  arise  in  obtaining  the  supply. 

Dr.  Smith  further  observes  on  this  subject:  "  When  we  are  in 
want  of  necessaries  we  must  part  with  all  superfluities,  of  which 
the  value,  as  it  rises  in  times  of  opulence  and  prosperity,  so  it 
sinks  in  times  of  poverty  and  distress . ' '  This  is  undoubtedly  true ; 
but  he  continues,  **  it  is  otherwise  with  necessaries.  Their  real 
price,  the  quantity  of  labour  which  they  can  purchase  or  com- 
mand, rises  in  times  of  poverty  and  distress,  and  sinks  in  times 
of  opulence  and  prosperity,  which  are  always  times  of  great, 
abundance,  for  they  could  not  otherwise  be  times  of  opulence 
and  prosperity.    Com  is  a  necessary,  silver  is  only  a  superfluity." 

Two  propositions  are  here  advanced  which  have  no  connection 
with  each  other;  one,  that  under  the  circumstances  supposed, 
corn  would  command  more  labour,  which  is  not  disputed;  the 
other,  that  com  would  sell  at  a  higher  money  price,  that  it  would 
exchange  for  more  silver;  this  I  contend  to  be  erroneous.  It 
might  be  tme  if  corn  were  at  the  same  time  scarce — if  the  usual 
supply  had  not  been  furnished.  But  in  this  case  it  is  abundant; 
it  is  not  pretended  that  a  less  quantity  than  usual  is  imported, 
or  that  more  is  required.  To  purchase  com,  the  Dutch  or 
Genoese  want  money,  and  to  obtain  this  money  they  are 
obliged  to  sell  their  superfluities.  It  is  the  market  value  and 
price  of  these  superfluities  which  falls,  and  money  appears  to 
rise  as  compared  with  them.  But  this  will  not  tend  to  increase 
the  demand  for  com,  nor  to  lower  the  value  of  money,  the  only 
two  causes  which  can  raise  the  price  of  com.  Money,  from  a 
want  of  credit,  and  from  other  causes,  may  be  in  great  demand, 
and  consequently  dear,  comparatively  with  corn;  but  on  no 
just  principle  can  it  be  maintained  that  under  such  circum- 
stances money  would  be  cheap  and,  therefore,  that  the  price 
of  com  would  rise. 

When  we  speak  of  the  high  or  low  value  of  gold,  silver,  or  any 


^ 


256  Political  Economy 

other  commodity  in  different  countries,  we  should  always 
mention  some  medium  in  which  we  are  estimating  them,  or  no 
idea  can  be  attached  to  the  proposition.  Thus,  when  gold  is 
said  to  be  dearer  in  England  than  in  Spain,  if  no  commodity  is 
mentioned,  what  notion  does  the  assertion  convey?  If  com, 
olives,  oil,  wine,  and  wool  be  at  a  cheaper  price  in  Spain  than 
in  England,  estimated  in  those  commodities  gold  is  dearer  in 
Spain.  If,  again,  hardware,  sugar,  cloth,  etc.,  be  at  a  lower 
price  in  England  than  in  Spain,  then,  estimated  in  those  com- 
modities, gold  is  dearer  in  England.  Thus  gold  appears  dearer 
or  cheaper  in  Spain  as  the  fancy  of  the  observer  may  fix  on 
the  medium  by  which  he  estimates  its  value.  Adam  Smith, 
having  stamped  com  and  labour  as  a  universal  measure  of  value, 
would  naturally  estimate  the  comparative  value  of  gold  by  the 
quantity  of  those  two  objects  for  which  it  would  exchange:  and, 
accordingly,  when  he  speaks  of  the  comparative  value  of  gold 
in  two  countries,  I  understand  him  to  mean  its  value  estimated 
in  com  and  labour. 

But  we  have  seen  that,  estimated  in  corn,  gold  may  be  of  very 
different  value  in  two  countries.  I  have  endeavoured  to  show 
that  it  will  be  low  in  rich  countries  and  high  in  poor  countries; 
Adam  Smith  is  of  a  different  opinion:  he  thinks  that  the  value 
of  gold,  estimated  in  corn,  is  highest  in  rich  countries.  But 
without  further  examining  which  of  these  opinions  is  correct, 
either  of  them  is  sufficient  to  show  that  gold  will  not  necessarily 
be  lower  in  those  countries  which  are  in  possession  of  the  mines, 
though  this  is  a  proposition  maintained  by  Adam  Smith. 
Suppose  England  to  be  possessed  of  the  mines,  and  Adam 
Smith's  opinion,  that  gold  is  of  the  greatest  value  in  rich  coun- 
tries, to  be  correct:  although  gold  would  naturally  flow  from 
England  to  all  other  countries  in  exchange  for  their  goods,  it 
would  not  follow  that  gold  was  necessarily  lower  in  England, 
as  compared  with  com  and  labour,  than  in  those  countries.  In 
another  place,  however,  Adam  Smith  speaks  of  the  precious 
metals  being  necessarily  lower  in  Spain  and  Portugal  than  in 
other  parts  of  Europe,  because  those  countries  happen  to  be 
almost  the  exclusive  possessors  of  the  mines  which  produce 
them.  **  Poland,  where  the  feudal  system  still  continues  to 
take  place,  is  at  this  day  as  beggarly  a  country  as  it  was  before 
the  discovery  of  America.  The  money  price  of  corn,  however, 
has  risen;  the  real  value  of  the  precious  metals  has 
FALLEN  in  Poland  in  the  same  manner  as  in  other  parts  of 
Europe.    Their  quantity,  therefore,  must  have  increased  there 


Comparative  Values  257 

as  in  other  places,  and  nearly  in  the  same  proportion  to  the  annual 
produce  of  the  land  and  labour.  This  increase  of  the  quantity 
of  those  metals,  however,  has  not,  it  seems,  increased  that  annual 
produce;  has  neither  improved  the  manufactures  and  agricul- 
ture of  the  country,  nor  mended  the  circumstances  of  its  in- 
habitants. Spain  and  Portugal,  the  countries  which  possess 
the  mines,  are,  after  Poland,  perhaps  the  two  most  beggarly 
countries  in  Europe.  The  value  of  the  precious  metals,  how- 
ever, must  he  lower  in  Spain  and  Portugal  than  in  any  other 
parts  of  Europe,  loaded  not  only  with  a  freight  and  insurance, 
but  with  the  expense  of  smuggling,  their  exportation  being  either 
prohibited  or  subjected  to  a  duty.  In  proportion  to  the  annual 
produce  of  the  land  and  labour,  therefore,  their  quantity  must  be 
greater  in  those  countries  than  in  any  other  part  of  Europe: 
those  countries,  however,  are  poorer  than  the  greater  part  of 
Europe.  Though  the  feudal  system  has  been  abolished  in  Spain 
and  Portugal,  it  has  not  been  succeeded  by  a  much  better." 

Dr.  Smith's  argument  appears  to  me  to  be  this:  Gold,  when 
estimated  in  com,  is  cheaper  in  Spain  than  in  other  countries, 
and  the  proof  of  this  is  not  that  com  is  given  by  other  countries 
to  Spain  for  gold,  but  that  cloth,  sugar,  hardware,  are  by  those 
countries  given  in  exchange  for  that  metal. 


CHAPTER  XXTX 

TAXES   PAID   BY  THE   PRODUCER 

M.  Say  greatly  magnifies  the  inconveniences  which  result  if 
a  tax  on  a  manufactured  commodity  is  levied  at  an  early, 
rather  than  at  a  late,  period  of  its  manufacture.  The  manu- 
facturers, he  observes,  through  whose  hands  the  commodity 
may  successively  pass,  must  employ  greater  funds  in  consequence 
of  having  to  advance  the  tax,  which  is  often  attended  with 
considerable  difficulty  to  a  manufacturer  of  very  limited  capital 
and  credit.    To  this  observation  no  objection  can  be  made. 

Another  inconvenience  on  which  he  dwells  is  that,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  advance  of  the  tax,  the  profits  on  the  advance 
also  must  be  charged  to  the  consumer,  and  that  this  additional 
tax  is  one  from  which  the  treasury  derives  no  advantage. 

In  this  latter  objection  I  cannot  agree  with  M.  Say.  The 
state,  we  will  suppose,  wants  to  raise  immediately  £1000,  and 
levies  it  on  a  manufacturer,  who  will  not  for  a  twelvemonth  be 
able  to  charge  it  to  the  consumer  on  his  finished  commodity. 
In  consequence  of  such  delay,  he  is  obliged  to  charge  for  his 
commodity  an  additional  price,  not  only  of  £1000,  the  amount 
of  the  tax,  but  probably  of  £1100,  £100  being  for  interest  on 
the  £1000  advanced.  But  in  return  for  this  additional  £100 
paid  by  the  consumer,  he  has  a  real  benefit,  inasmuch  as  his 
payment  of  the  tax  which  government  required  immediately, 
and  which  he  must  finally  pay,  has  been  postponed  for  a  year; 
an  opportunity,  therefore,  has  been  afforded  to  him  of  lending 
to  the  manufacturer  who  had  occasion  for  it  the  £1000,  at  10  per 
cent.,  or  at  any  other  rate  of  interest  which  might  be  agreed 
upon.  Eleven  hundred  pounds,  payable  at  the  end  of  one  year, 
when  money  is  at  10  per  cent,  interest,  is  of  no  more  value  than 
/looo  to  be  paid  immediately.  If  government  delayed  receiving; 
the  tax  for  one  year  till  the  manufacture  of  the  commodity  was 
completed,  it  would  perhaps  be  obliged  to  issue  an  exchequer 
bill  bearing  interest,  and  it  would  pay  as  much  for  interest  as 
the  consumer  would  save  in  price,  excepting,  indeed,  that 
portion  of  the  price  which  the  manufacturer  might  be  enabled, 
in  consequence  of  the  tax,  to  add  to  his  own  real  gains.    If  for 


I 


Taxes  Paid  by  Producer  259 

the  interest  of  the  exchequer  bill  government  would  pay  5  per 
cent.,  a  tax  of  £50  is  saved  by  not  issuing  it.  If  the  manu- 
facturer borrowed  the  additional  capital  at  5  per  cent.,  and 
charged  the  consumer  10  per  cent.,  he  also  will  have  gained 
5  per  cent,  on  his  advance,  over  and  above  his  usual  profits, 
so  that  the  manufacturer  and  government  together  gain  or 
save  precisely  the  sum  which  the  consumer  pa^'S. 

M.  Simonde,  in  his  excellent  work,  De  la  Richesse  Commerctale, 
following  the  same  line  of  argument  as  M.  Say,  has  calculated 
that  a  tax  of  4000  francs,  paid  originally  by  a  manufacturer, 
whose  profits  were  at  the  moderate  rate  of  10  per  cent.,  would, 
if  the  commodity  manufactured  only  passed  through  the  hands 
of  five  different  persons,  be  raised  to  the  consumer  to  the  sum 
of  6734  francs.  This  calculation  proceeds  on  the  supposition 
that  he  who  first  advanced  the  tax  would  receive  from  the  next 
manufacturer  4400  francs,  and  he  again  from  the  next,  4840 
francs;  so  that  at  each  step  10  per  cent,  on  its  value  would  be 
added  to  it.  This  is  to  suppose  that  the  value  of  the  tax  would 
be  accumulating  at  compound  interest;  not  at  the  rate  of  10 
per  cent,  per  annum,  but  at  an  absolute  rate  of  10  per  cent,  at 
every  step  of  its  progress.  This  opinion  of  M.  de  Simonde 
would  be  correct  if  five  years  elapsed  between  the  first  advance 
of  the  tax  and  the  sale  of  the  taxed  commodity  to  the  con- 
sumer; but  if  one  year  only  elapsed,  a  remuneration  of  400 
francs,  instead  of  2734,  would  give  a  profit  at  the  rate  of  10  per 
cent,  per  annum  to  all  who  had  contributed  to  the  advance  of 
the  tax,  whether  the  commodity  had  passed  through  the  hands 
of  five  manufacturers  or  fifty. 


CHAPTER  XXX 

ON  THE   INFLUENCE   OF   DEMAND   AND   SUPPLY  ON   PRICES 

It  is  the  cost  of  production  which  must  ultimately  regulate  the 
price  of  commodities,  and  not,  as  has  been  often  said,  the  pro- 
portion between  the  supply  and  demand:  the  proportion 
between  supply  and  demand  may,  indeed,  for  a  time,  aflfect  the 
market  value  of  a  commodity,  until  it  is  supplied  in  greater  or 
less  abundance,  according  as  the  demand  may  have  increased 
or  diminished ;  but  this  effect  will  be  only  of  temporary  duration. 

Diminish  the  cost  of  production  of  hats,  and  their  price  will 
ultimately  fall  to  their  new  natural  price,  although  the  demand 
should  be  doubled,  trebled,  or  quadrupled.  Diminish  the  cost 
of  subsistence  of  men,  by  diminishing  the  natural  price  of  the 
food  and  clothing  by  which  life  is  sustained,  and  wages  will 
ultimately  fall,  notwithstanding  that  the  demand  for  labourers 
may  very  greatly  increase. 

The  opinion  that  the  price  of  commodities  depends  solely  on 
the  proportion  of  supply  to  demand,  or  demand  to  supply,  has 
become  almost  an  axiom  in  political  economy,  and  has  been 
the  source  of  much  error  in  that  science.  It  is  this  opinion 
which  has  made  Mr.  Buchanan  maintain  that  wages  are  not 
influenced  by  a  rise  or  fall  in  the  price  of  provisions,  but  solely 
by  the  demand  and  supply  of  labour;  and  that  a  tax  on  the 
wages  of  labour  would  not  raise  wages,  because  it  would  not 
alter  the  proportion  of  the  demand  of  labourers  to  the  supply. 

The  demand  for  a  commodity  cannot  be  said  to  increase  if 
no  additional  quantity  of  it  be  purchased  or  consumed ;  and  yet 
under  such  circumstances  its  money  value  may  rise.  Thus,  if 
the  value  of  money  were  to  fall,  the  price  of  every  commodity 
would  rise,  for  each  of  the  competitors  would  be  willing  to  spend 
more  money  than  before  on  its  purchase ;  but  though  its  price 
rose  ID  or  20  per  cent.,  if  no  more  were  bought  than  before,  it 
would  not,  I  apprehend,  be  admissible  to  say  that  the  variation 
in  the  price  of  the  commodity  was  caused  by  the  increased 
demand  for  it.     Its  natural  price,  its  money  cost  of  production. 

260 


Influence  of  Demand  and  Supply      261 

would  be  really  altered  by  the  altered  value  of  money;  and 
without  any  increase  of  demand,  the  price  of  the  commodity 
would  be  naturally  adjusted  to  that  new  value. 

"  We  have  seen,"  says  M.  Say,  "  that  the  cost  of  production 
determines  the  lowest  price  to  which  things  can  fall:  the  price 
below  which  they  cannot  remain  for  any  length  of  time,  because 
production  would  then  be  either  entirely  stopped  or  diminished." 
Vol.  ii.  p.  26. 

He  afterwards  says  that  the  demand  for  gold  having  increased 
in  a  still  greater  proportion  than  the  supply,  since  the  discovery 
of  the  mines,  "  its  price  in  goods,  instead  of  falling  in  the  pro- 
portion of  ten  to  one,  fell  only  in  the  proportion  of  four  to  one;  " 
that  is  to  say,  instead  of  falling  in  proportion  as  its  natural 
price  had  fallen,  fell  in  proportion  as  the  supply  exceeded  the 
demand.^ — "  The  value  of  every  commodity  rises  always  in  a 
direct  ratio  to  the  demand,  and  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  the  supply.^' 

The  same  opinion  is  expressed  by  the  Earl  of  Lauderdale. 

"  With  respect  to  the  variations  in  value,  of  which  everything 
valuable  is  susceptible,  if  we  could  for  a  moment  suppose  that 
any  substance  possessed  intrinsic  and  fixed  value,  so  as  to  render 
an  assumed  quantity  of  it  constantly,  under  all  circumstances, 
of  an  equal  value,  then  the  degree  of  value  of  all  things,  ascer- 
tained by  such  a  fixed  standard,  would  vary  according  to  the 
proportion  betwixt  the  quantity  oj  them  and  the  demand  for  them, 
and  every  commodity  would,  of  course,  be  subject  to  a  variation 
in  its  value,  from  four  different  circumstances: 

1.  "  It  would  be  subject  to  an  increase  of  its  value,  from  a 
diminution  of  its  quantity. 

2.  "  To  a  diminution  of  its  value,  from  an  augmentation  of 
its  quantity. 

3.  "  It  might  suffer  an  augmentation  in  its  value,  from  the 
circumstance  of  an  increased  demand. 

4.  "  Its  value  might  be  diminished  by  a  failure  of  demand. 

"  As  it  will,  however,  clearly  appear  that  no  commodity  can 
possess  fixed  and  intrinsic  value,  so  as  to  qualify  it  for  a  measure 
of  the  value  of  other  commodities,  mankind  are  induced  to  select, 
as  a  practical  measure  of  value,  that  which  appears  the  least 

^  If,  with  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver  which  actually  exists,  these 
metals  only  served  for  the  manufacture  of  utensils  and  ornaments,  they 
would  be  abundant,  and  would  be  much  cheaper  than  they  are  at  present: 
in  other  words,  in  exchanging  them  for  any  other  species  of  goods,  wo 
should  be  obliged  to  give  proportionally  a  greater  quantity  of  them.  But 
as  a  large  quantity  of  these  metals  is  used  for  money,  and  as  this  portion 
is  used  for  no  other  purpose,  there  remains  less  to  be  employed  in  furniture 
and  jewellery;  now  this  scarcity  adds  to  their  value. — Say,  vol.  ii.  p.  316. 


262  Political  Economy 


?5^1^H 


liable  to  any  of  these  four  sources  of  variations,  which  are  the 
causes  of  alteration  of  value. 

"  When,  in  common  language,  therefore,  we  express  the  value 
of  any  commodity,  it  may  vary  at  one  period  from  what  it  is  at 
another,  in  consequence  of  eight  different  contingencies : — 

1.  "  From  the  four  circumstances  above  stated,  in  relation  to 
the  commodity  of  which  we  mean  to  express  the  value. 

2.  "  From  the  same  four  circumstances,  in  relation  to  the 
commodity  we  have  adopted  as  a  measure  of  value."  ^ 

This  is  true  of  monopolised  commodities,  and,  indeed,  of  the 
market  price  of  all  other  commodities  for  a  limited  period.  If 
the  demand  for  hats  should  be  doubled,  the  price  would  imme- 
diately rise,  but  that  rise  would  be  only  temporary,  unless  the 
cost  of  production  of  hats  or  their  natural  price  were  raised. 
If  the  natural  price  of  bread  should  fall  50  per  cent,  from  some 
great  discovery  in  the  science  of  agriculture,  the  demand  would 
not  greatly  increase,  for  no  man  would  desire  more  than  would 
satisfy  his  wants,  and  as  the  demand  would  not  increase,  neither 
would  the  supply;  for  a  commodity  is  not  supplied  merely 
because  it  can  be  produced,  but  because  there  is  a  demand  for 
it.  Here,  then,  we  have  a  case  where  the  supply  and  demand 
have  scarcely  varied,  or,  if  they  have  increased,  they  have 
increased  in  the  same  proportion;  and  yet  the  price  of  bread 
will  have  fallen  50  per  cent.,  at  a  time,  too,  when  the  value  of 
money  had  continued  invariable. 

Commodities  which  are  monopolised,  either  by  an  individual 
or  by  a  company,  vary  according  to  the  law  which  Lord  Lauder- 
dale has  laid  down :  they  fall  in  proportion  as  the  sellers  augment 
their  quantity,  and  rise  in  proportion  to  the  eagerness  of  the 
buyers  to  purchase  them;  their  price  has  no  necessary  connec- 
tion with  their  natural  value:  but  the  prices  of  commodities 
which  are  subject  to  competition,  and  whose  quantity  may  be 
increased  in  any  moderate  degree,  will  ultimately  depend,  not 
on  the  state  of  demand  and  supply,  but  on  the  increased  or 
diminished  cost  of  their  production. 

^  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and  Ori'^in  of  Public  Wealth,  p.  13. 


CHAPTER  XXXI 

ON   MACHINERY 

In  the  present  chapter  I  shall  enter  into  some  inquiry  respecting 
the  influence  of  machinery  on  the  interests  of  the  different 
classes  of  society,  a  subject  of  great  importance,  and  one  which 
appears  never  to  have  been  investigated  in  a  manner  to  lead  to 
any  certain  or  satisfactory  results.  It  is  more  incumbent  on 
me  to  declare  my  opinion  on  this  question,  because  they  have, 
on  further  reflection,  undergone  a  considerable  change;  and 
although  I  am  not  aware  that  I  have  ever  published  anything 
respecting  machinery  which  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  retract, 
yet  I  have  in  other  ways  given  my  support  to  doctrines  which 
I  now  think  erroneous;  it  therefore  becomes  a  duty  in  me  to 
submit  my  present  views  to  examination,  with  my  reasons  for 
entertaining  them. 

Ever  since  I  first  turned  my  attention  to  questions  of  political 
economy,  I  have  been  of  opinion  that  such  an  application  of 
machinery  to  any  branch  of  production  as  should  have  the  effect 
of  saving  labour  was  a  general  good,  accompanied  only  with 
that  portion  of  inconvenience  which  in  most  cases  attends  the 
removal  of  capital  and  labour  from  one  employment  to  another. 
It  appeared  to  me  that,  provided  the  landlords  had  the  same 
money  rents,  they  would  be  benefited  by  the  reduction  in  the 
prices  of  some  of  the  commodities  on  which  those  rents  were 
expended,  and  which  reduction  of  price  could  not  fail  to  be  the 
consequence  of  the  employment  of  machinery.  The  capitalist, 
I  thought,  was  eventually  benefited  precisely  in  the  same 
manner.  He,  indeed,  who  made  the  discovery  of  the  machine, 
or  who  first  usefully  applied  it,  would  enjoy  an  additional 
advantage  by  making  great  profits  for  a  time ;  but,  in  proportion 
as  the  machine  came  into  general  use,  the  price  of  the  commodity 
produced  would,  from  the  effects  of  competition,  sink  to  its  cost 
of  production,  when  the  capitalist  would  get  the  same  money 
profits  as  before,  and  he  would  only  participate  in  the  general 
advantage  as  a  consumer,  by  being  enabled,  with  the  same 
money  revenue,  to  command  an  additional  quantity  of  comforts 
and  enjoyments.    The  class  of  labourers  also,  I  thought,  was 

263 


have  ^1 


264  Political  Economy 

equally  benefited  by  the  use  of  machinery,  as  they  would 
the  means  of  buying  more  commodities  with  the  sa  .ley 

wages,  and  I  thought  that  no  reduction  of  wages  would  take 
place  because  the  capitalist  would  have  the  power  of  demanding 
and  employing  the  same  quantity  of  labour  as  before,  although 
he  might  be  under  the  necessity  of  employing  it  in  the  pro- 
duction of  a  new  or,  at  any  rate,  of  a  different  commodity. 
If,  by  improved  machinery,  with  the  employment  of  the  same 
quantity  of  labour,  the  quantity  of  stockings  could  be  quad- 
rupled, and  the  demand  for  stockings  were  only  doubled,  some 
labourers  would  necessarily  be  discharged  from  the  stocking 
trade;  but  as  the  capital  which  employed  them  was  still  in 
being,  and  as  it  was  the  interest  of  those  who  had  it  to  employ 
it  productively,  it  appeared  to  me  that  it  would  be  emplo^'cd 
on  the  production  of  some  other  commodity  useful  to  the  society, 
for  which  there  could  not  fail  to  be  a  demand ;  for  I  was,  and  am, 
deeply  impressed  with  the  truth  of  the  observation  of  Adam 
Smith,  that  "  the  desire  for  food  is  limited  in  every  man  by  the 
narrow  capacity  of  the  human  stomach,  but  the  desire  of  the 
conveniences  and  ornaments  of  building,  dress,  equipage,  and 
household  furniture,  seems  to  have  no  limit  or  certain  boundary." 
As,  then,  it  appeared  to  me  that  there  would  be  the  same  demand 
for  labour  as  before,  and  that  wages  would  be  no  lower,  I  thought 
that  the  labouring  class  would,  equally  with  the  other  classes, 
participate  in  the  advantage,  from  the  general  cheapness  of 
commodities  arising  from  the  use  of  machinery. 

These  were  my  opinions,  and  they  continue  unaltered,  as  far 
as  regards  the  landlord  and  the  capitalist;  but  I  am  convinced 
that  the  substitution  of  machinery  for  human  labour  is  often 
very  injurious  to  the  interests  of  the  class  of  labourers. 

My  mistake  arose  from  the  supposition  that  whenever  the 
net  income  of  a  society  increased,  its  gross  income  would  also 
increase;  I  now,  however,  see  reason  to  be  satisfied  that  the 
one  fund,  from  which  landlords  and  capitalists  derive  their 
revenue,  may  increase,  while  the  other,  that  upon  which  the 
labouring  class  mainly  depend,  may  diminish,  and  therefore  it 
follows,  if  I  am  right,  that  the  same  cause  which  may  increase 
the  net  revenue  of  the  country  may  at  the  same  time  render 
the  population  redundant,  and  deteriorate  the  condition  of  the 
labourer. 

A  capitalist,  we  will  suppose,  employs  a  capital  of  the  value  of 
£20,000,  and  that  he  carries  on  the  joint  business  of  a  fanner 
and  a  manufacturer  of  necessaries.     We  will  further  suppose 


i 
I 


i 


On  Machinery  265 

that  £7000  of  this  capital  is  invested  in  fixed  capital,  viz.  in 
buildings,  implements,  etc.,  etc.,  and  that  the  remaining  £13,000 
is  employed  as  circulating  capital  in  the  support  of  labour. 
Let  us  suppose,  too,  that  profits  are  10  per  cent.,  and  conse- 
quently that  the  capitalist's  capital  is  every  year  put  into  its 
original  state  of  efficiency  and  yields  a  profit  of  £2000. 

Each  year  the  capitalist  begins  his  operations  by  having  food 
and  necessaries  in  his  possession  of  the  value  of  £13,000,  all  of 
which  he  sells  in  the  course  of  the  year  to  his  own  workmen  for 
that  sum  of  money,  and,  during  the  same  period,  he  pays  them 
the  like  amount  of  money  for  wages:  at  the  end  of  the  year 
they  replace  in  his  possession  food  and  necessaries  of  the  value 
of  £15,000,  £2000  of  which  he  consumes  himself,  or  disposes  of 
as  may  best  suit  his  pleasure  and  gratification.  As  far  as  these 
products  are  concerned,  the  gross  produce  for  that  year  is 
£15,000,  and  the  net  produce  £2000.  Suppose,  now,  that  the 
following  year  the  capitalist  employs  half  his  men  in  constructing 
a  machine,  and  the  other  half  in  producing  food  and  necessaries 
as  usual.  During  that  year  he  would  pay  the  sum  of  £13,000 
in  wages  as  usual,  and  would  sell  food  and  necessaries  to  the 
same  amount  to  his  workmen;  but  what  would  be  the  case  the 
following  year? 

While  the  machine  was  being  made,  only  one-half  of  the  usual 
quantity  of  food  and  necessaries  would  be  obtained,  and  they 
would  be  only  one-half  the  value  of  the  quantity  which  was 
produced  before.  The  machine  would  be  worth  £7500,  and 
ihe  food  and  necessaries  £7500,  and,  therefore,  the  capital  of 
the  capitalist  would  be  as  great  as  before;  for  he  would  have, 
besides  these  two  values,  his  fixed  capital  worth  £7000,  making 
in  the  whole  £20,000  capital,  and  £2000  profit.  After  deducting 
this  latter  sum  for  his  own  expenses,  he  would  have  a  no  greater 
circulating  capital  than  £5500  with  which  to  carry  on  his  sub- 
sequent operations;  and,  therefore,  his  means  of  employing 
labour  would  be  reduced  in  the  proportion  of  £13,000  to  £5500, 
and,  consequently,  all  the  labour  which  was  before  employed 
by  £7500  would  become  redundant. 

The  reduced  quantity  of  labour  which  the  capitalist  can 
employ,  must,  indeed,  with  the  assistance  of  the  machine,  and 
after  deductions  for  its  repairs,  produce  a  value  equal  to  £7500, 
it  must  replace  the  circulating  capital  with  a  profit  of  £2000  on 
the  whole  capital;  but  if  this  be  done,  if  the  net  income  be  not 
diminished,  of  what  importance  is  it  to  the  capitalist  whether  the 
gross  income  be  of  the  value  of  £3000,  of  £10,000,  or  of  £15,000? 


266  Political  Economy 

In  this  case,  then,  although  the  net  produce  will  not  be 
diminished  in  value,  although  its  power  of  purchasing  com- 
modities may  be  greatly  increased,  the  gross  produce  will  have 
fallen  from  a  value  of  £15,000  to  a  value  of  £7500;  and  as 
the  power  of  supporting  a  population,  and  employing  labour, 
depends  always  on  the  gross  produce  of  a  nation,  and  not  on 
its  net  produce,  there  will  necessarily  be  a  diminution  in  the 
demand  for  labour,  population  will  become  redundant,  and  the 
situation  of  the  labouring  classes  will  be  that  of  distress  and 
poverty. 

As,  however,  the  power  of  saving  from  revenue  to  add  to 
capital  must  depend  on  the  efficiency  of  the  net  revenue,  to 
satisfy  the  wants  of  the  capitalist,  it  could  not  fail  to  follow 
from  the  reduction  in  the  price  of  commodities  consequent  on 
the  introduction  of  machinery  that  with  the  same  wants  he 
would  have  increased  means  of  saving — increased  facility  of 
transferring  revenue  into  capital.  But  with  every  increase  of 
capital  he  would  employ  more  labourers;  and,  therefore,  a 
portion  of  the  people  thrown  out  of  work  in  the  first  instance 
would  be  subsequently  employed ;  and  if  the  increased  produc- 
tion, in  consequence  of  the  employment  of  the  machine,  was  so 
great  as  to  afiford,  in  the  shape  of  net  produce,  as  great  a  quantity 
of  food  and  necessaries  as  existed  before  in  the  form  of  gross 
produce,  there  would  be  the  same  ability  to  employ  the  whole 
population,  and,  therefore,  there  would  not  necessarily  be  any 
redundancy  of  people. 

All  I  wish  to  prove  is  that  the  discovery  and  use  of  machinery 
may  be  attended  with  a  diminution  of  gross  produce;  and 
whenever  that  is  the  case,  it  will  be  injurious  to  the  labouring 
class,  as  some  of  their  number  will  be  thrown  out  of  employ- 
ment, and  population  will  become  redundant  compared  with 
the  funds  which  are  to  employ  it. 

The  case  which  I  have  supposed  is  the  most  simple  that  I 
could  select;  but  it  would  make  no  difference  in  the  result  if 
we  supposed  that  the  machinery  was  applied  to  the  trade  of 
any  manufacturer  —  that  of  a  clothier,  for  example,  or  of  a 
cotton  manufacturer.  If,  in  the  trade  of  a  clothier,  less  cloth 
would  be  produced  after  the  introduction  of  machinery,  for  a 
part  of  that  quantity  which  is  disposed  of  for  the  purpose  of 
paying  a  large  body  of  workmen  would  not  be  required  by  their 
employer.  In  consequence  of  using  the  machine,  it  would  be 
necessary  for  him  to  reproduce  a  value  only  equal  to  the  value 
consumed,   together  with   the  profits  on  the  whole  capital. 


On  Machinery  267 

£7500  might  do  this  as  effectually  as  £15,000  did  before,  the 
case  differing  in  no  respect  from  the  former  instance.  It  may- 
be said,  however,  that  the  demand  for  cloth  would  be  as  great 
as  before,  and  it  may  be  asked  from  whence  would  this  supply 
come?  But  by  whom  would  the  cloth  be  demanded?  By  the 
farmers  and  the  other  producers  of  necessaries,  who  employed 
their  capitals  in  producing  these  necessaries  as  a  means  of  obtain- 
ing cloth:  they  gave  com  and  necessaries  to  the  clothier  for 
cloth,  and  he  bestowed  them  on  his  workmen  for  the  cloth 
which  their  work  afforded  him. 

This  trade  would  now  cease;  the  clothier  would  not  want  the 
food  and  clothing,  having  fewer  men  to  employ  and  having  less 
cloth  to  dispose  of.  The  farmers  and  others,  who  only  pro- 
duced necessaries  as  means  to  an  end,  could  no  longer  obtain 
cloth  by  such  an  application  of  their  capitals,  and,  therefore, 
they  would  cither  themselves  employ  their  capitals  in  producing 
cloth,  or  would  lend  them  to  others,  in  order  that  the  commodity 
really  wanted  might  be  furnished;  and  that  for  which  no  one 
had  the  means  of  paying,  or  for  which  there  was  no  demand, 
might  cease  to  be  produced.  This,  then,  leads  us  to  the  same 
result;  the  demand  for  labour  would  diminish,  and  the  com- 
modities necessary  to  the  support  of  labour  would  not  be 
produced  in  the  same  abundance. 

If  these  views  be  correct,  it  follows,  first,  that  the  discovery 
and  useful  application  of  machinery  always  leads  to  the  increase 
of  the  net  produce  of  the  country,  although  it  may  not,  and 
will  not,  after  an  inconsiderable  interval,  increase  the  value  of 
that  net  produce. 

Secondly,  that  an  increase  of  the  net  produce  of  a  country  is 
compatible  with  a  diminution  of  the  gross  produce,  and  that 
the  motives  for  employing  machinery  are  always  sufficient  to 
ensure  its  employment  if  it  will  increase  the  net  produce, 
although  it  may,  and  frequently  must,  diminish  both  the 
quantity  of  the  gross  produce  and  its  value. 

Thirdly,  that  the  opinion  entertained  by  the  labouring  class, 
that  the  employment  of  machinery  is  frequently  detrimental  to 
their  interests,  is  not  founded  on  prejudice  and  error,  but  is 
conformable  to  the  correct  principles  of  political  economy. 

Fourthly,  that  if  the  improved  means  of  production,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  use  of  machinery,  should  increase  the  net  produce 
of  a  country  in  a  degree  so  great  as  not  to  diminish  the  gross 
produce  (I  mean  always  quantity  of  commodities,  and  not 
value),  then  the  situation  of  all  classes  will  be  improved.    The 


268  Political  Economy 

landlord  and  capitalist  will  benefit,  not  by  an  increase  of  rent 
and  profit,  but  by  the  advantages  resulting  from  the  expenditure 
of  the  same  rent  and  profit  on  commodities  very  considerably 
reduced  in  value,  while  the  situation  of  the  labouring  classes 
will  also  be  considerably  improved;  First,  from  the  increased 
demand  for  menial  servants;  secondly,  from  the  stimulus  to 
savings  from  revenue  which  such  an  abundant  net  produce  will 
afford;  and,  thirdly,  from  the  low  price  of  all  articles  of  con- 
sumption on  which  their  wages  will  be  expended. 

Independently  of  the  consideration  of  the  discover\^  and  use  of 
machinery,  to  which  our  attention  has  been  just  directed,  the 
labouring  class  have  no  small  interest  in  the  manner  in  which 
the  net  income  of  the  country  is  expended,  although  it  should, 
in  all  cases,  be  expended  for  the  gratification  and  enjoyments 
of  those  who  are  fairly  entitled  to  it. 

If  a  landlord,  or  a  capitalist,  expends  his  revenue  in  the  manner 
of  an  ancient  baron,  in  the  support  of  a  great  number  of  retainers, 
or  menial  servants,  he  will  give  employment  to  much  more 
labour  than  if  he  expended  it  on  fine  clothes  or  costly  furniture, 
on  carriages,  on  horses,  or  in  the  purchase  of  any  other  luxuries. 

In  both  cases  the  net  revenue  would  be  the  same,  and  so  would 
be  the  gross  revenue,  but  the  former  would  be  realised  in  dif- 
ferent commodities.  If  my  revenue  were  £10,000,  the  same 
quantity  nearly  of  productive  labour  would  be  employed 
whether  I  realised  it  in  fine  clothes  and  costly  furniture,  etc., 
etc.,  or  in  a  quantity  of  food  and  clothing  of  the  same  value. 
If,  however,  I  realised  my  revenue  in  the  first  set  of  commo- 
dities, no  more  labour  would  be  consequently  employed:  I 
should  enjoy  my  furniture  and  my  clothes,  and  there  would  be 
an  end  of  them ;  but  if  I  realised  my  revenue  in  food  and  clothing, 
and  my  desire  was  to  employ  menial  servants,  all  those  whom 
I  could  so  employ  with  my  revenue  of  £10,000,  or  with  the 
food  and  clothing  which  it  would  purchase,  would  be  to  be  added 
to  the  former  demand  for  labourers,  and  this  additic  n  would  take 
place  only  because  I  chose  this  mode  of  expending  my  revenue. 
As  the  labourers,  then,  are  interested  in  the  demand  for  labour, 
they  must  naturally  desire  that  as  much  of  the  revenue  as 
possible  should  be  diverted  from  expenditure  on  luxuries  to  be 
expended  in  the  support  of  menial  servants. 

In  the  same  manner,  a  country  engaged  in  war,  and  which  is 
under  the  necessity  of  maintaining  large  fleets  and  armies, 
employs  a  great  many  more  men  than  will  be  employed  when 


i 


On  Machinery  269 

the  war  terminates,  and  the  annual  expenses  which  it  brings 
with  it,  cease. 

If  I  were  not  called  upon  for  a  tax  of  £500  during  the  war,  and 
which  is  expended  on  men  in  the  situations  of  soldiers  and  sailors, 
I  might  probably  expend  that  portion  of  my  income  on  furniture, 
clothes,  books,  etc.,  etc.,  and  whether  it  was  expended  in  the 
one  way  or  in  the  other,  there  would  be  the  same  quantity  of 
labour  employed  in  production ;  for  the  food  and  clothing  of  the 
soldier  and  sailor  would  require  the  same  amount  of  industry 
to  produce  it  as  the  more  luxurious  commodities;  but  in  the 
case  of  the  war,  there  would  be  the  additional  demand  for  men 
as  soldiers  and  sailors;  and,  consequently,  a  war  which  is  sup- 
ported out  of  the  revenue,  and  not  from  the  capital  of  a  country, 
is  favourable  to  the  increase  of  population. 

At  the  termination  of  the  war,  when  part  of  my  revenue 
reverts  to  me,  and  is  employed  as  before  in  the  purchase  of  wine, 
furniture,  or  other  luxuries,  the  population  which  it  before 
supported,  and  which  the  war  called  into  existence,  will  become 
redundant,  and  by  its  effect  on  the  rest  of  the  population,  and  its 
competition  with  it  for  employment,  will  sink  the  value  of  wages, 
and  very  materially  deteriorate  the  condition  of  the  labouring 
classes. 

There  is  one  other  case  that  should  be  noticed  of  the  possibility 
of  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  the  net  revenue  of  a  country,  and 
even  of  its  gross  revenue,  with  a  diminution  of  demand  for 
labour,  and  that  is  when  the  labour  of  horses  is  substituted  for 
that  of  man.  If  I  employed  one  hundred  men  on  my  farm,  and 
if  I  found  that  the  food  bestowed  on  fifty  of  those  men  could 
be  diverted  to  the  support  of  horses,  and  afford  me  a  greater 
return  of  raw  produce,  after  allowing  for  the  interest  of  the 
capital  which  the  purchase  of  the  horses  would  absorb,  it  would 
be  advantageous  to  me  to  substitute  the  horses  for  the  men,  and 
I  should  accordingly  do  so;  but  this  would  not  be  for  the 
interest  of  the  men,  and  unless  the  income  I  obtained  was  so 
much  increased  as  to  enable  me  to  employ  the  men  as  well  as  the 
horses,  it  is  evident  that  the  p>opulation  would  become  redundant 
and  the  labourer's  condition  would  sink  in  the  general  scale. 
It  is  evident  he  could  not,  under  any  circumstances,  be  employed 
in  agriculture;  but  if  the  produce  of  the  land  were  increased  by 
the  substitution  of  horses  for  men,  he  might  be  employed  in 
manufactures,  or  as  a  menial  servant. 

The  statements  which  I  have  made  will  not,  I  hope,  lead  to  the 
inference  that  machinery  should  not  be  encouraged.    To  eluci- 


m 


270  Political  Economy 

date  the  principle,  I  have  been  supposing  that  impro^ 
machinery  is  suddenly  discovered  and  extensively  used;  but 
the  truth  is  that  these  discoveries  are  gradual,  and  rather 
operate  in  determining  the  employment  of  the  capital  which  is 
saved  and  accumulated  than  in  diverting  capital  from  its 
actual  employment. 

With  every  increase  of  capital  and  population  food  will 
generally  rise,  on  account  of  its  being  more  difficult  to  produce. 
The  consequence  of  a  rise  of  food  will  be  a  rise  of  wages,  and 
ever}^  rise  of  wages  will  have  a  tendency  to  determine  the  saved 
capital  in  a  greater  proportion  than  before  to  the  employment 
of  machinery.  Machinery  and  labour  are  in  constant  com- 
petition, and  the  former  can  frequently  not  be  employed  until 
labour  rises. 

In  America  and  many  other  countries,  where  the  food  of  man 
is  easily  provided,  there  is  not  nearly  such  great  temptation  to 
employ  machinery  as  in  England,  where  food  is  high  and  costs 
much  labour  for  its  production.  The  same  cause  that  raises 
labour  does  not  raise  the  value  of  machines,  and,  therefore, 
with  every  augmentation  of  capital,  a  greater  proportion  of  it  is 
employed  on  machinery.  The  demand  for  labour  will  continue 
to  increase  with  an  increase  of  capital,  but  not  in  proportion  to 
its  increase;  the  ratio  will  necessarily  be  a  diminishing  ratio.^ 

I  have  before  observed,  too,  that  the  increase  of  net  incomes, 
estimated  in  commodities,  which  is  always  the  consequence  of 
improved  machinery,  will  lead  to  new  savings  and  accumula- 

^  "  The  demand  for  labour  depends  on  the  increasing  of  circulating  and 
not  of  fixed  capital.  Were  it  true  that  the  proportion  between  these  two 
sorts  of  capital  is  the  same  at  all  times,  and  in  all  countries,  then,  indeed, 
it  follows  that  the  number  of  labourers  employed  is  in  proportion  to  the 
the  wealth  of  the  state.  But  such  a  position  has  not  the  semblance  of 
probability.  As  arts  are  cultivated,  and  civilisation  is  extended,  fixed 
capital  bears  a  larger  and  larger  proportion  to  circulating  capital.  The 
amount  of  fixed  capital  employed  in  the  production  of  a  piece  of  British 
muslin  is  at  least  a  hundred,  probably  a  thousand  times  greater  than  that 
employed  in  the  production  of  a  similar  piece  of  Indian  muslin.  And  the 
proportion  of  circulating  capital  employed  is  a  hundred  or  a  thousand 
times  less.  It  is  easy  to  conceive  that,  under  certain  circumstances,  the 
whole  of  the  annual  savings  of  an  industrious  people  might  be  added  to 
fixed  capital,  in  which  case  they  would  have  no  effect  in  increasing  the 
demand  for  labour." — Barton,  On  the  Condition  of  the  Labouring  Classes  of 
Society,  page  16. 

It  is  not  easy,  I  think,  to  conceive  that,  under  any  circumstances,  an 
increase  of  capital  should  not  be  followed  by  an  increased  demand  for 
laboiu:;  the  most  that  can  be  said  is,  that  the  demand  will  be  in  a  diminish- 
ing ratio.  Mr.  Barton,  in  the  above  publication,  has,  I  think,  taken  a 
correct  view  of  some  of  the  effects  of  an  increasing  amount  of  fixed  capital 
on  the  condition  of  the  labouring  classes.  His  essay  contains  much 
valuable  information. 


I 


On  Machinery  271 

tions.  These  savings,  it  must  be  remembered,  are  annual, 
and  must  soon  create  a  fund  much  greater  than  the  gross  revenue 
originally  lost  by  the  discovery  of  the  machine,  when  the  demand 
for  labour  will  be  as  great  as  before,  and  the  situation  of  the 
people  will  be  still  further  improved  by  the  increased  savings 
which  the  increased  net  revenue  will  still  enable  them  to  make. 

The  employment  of  machinery  could  never  be  safely  dis- 
couraged in  a  state,  for  if  a  capital  is  not  allowed  to  get  the 
greatest  net  revenue  that  the  use  of  machinery  will  afford  here, 
it  will  be  carried  abroad,  and  this  must  be  a  much  more  serious 
discouragement  to  the  demand  for  labour  than  the  most  exten- 
sive employment  of  machinery ;  for  while  a  capital  is  employed 
in  this  country  it  must  create  a  demand  for  some  labour; 
machinery'  cannot  be  worked  without  the  assistance  of  men,  it 
cannot  be  made  but  with  the  contribution  of  their  labour.  By 
investing  part  of  a  capital  in  improved  machinery  there  will  be 
a  diminution  in  the  progressive  demand  for  labour;  by  exporting 
it  to  another  country  the  demand  will  be  wholly  annihilated. 

The  prices  of  commodities,  too,  are  regulated  by  their  cost  of 
production.  By  employing  improved  machinery,  the  cost  of 
production  of  commodities  is  reduced,  and,  consequently,  you 
can  afford  to  sell  them  in  foreign  markets  at  a  cheaper  price. 
If,  however,  you  were  to  reject  the  use  of  machinery,  while  all 
other  countries  encouraged  it,  you  would  be  obliged  to  export 
your  money,  in  exchange  for  foreign  goods,  till  you  sunk  the 
natural  prices  of  your  goods  to  the  prices  of  other  countries. 
In  making  your  exchanges  with  those  countries  you  might  give 
a  commodity  which  cost  two  days'  labour  here  for  a  commodity 
which  cost  one  abroad,  and  this  disadvantageous  exchange 
would  be  the  consequence  of  your  own  act,  for  the  commody 
which  you  export,  and  which  cost  you  two  days'  labour,  would 
have  cost  you  only  one  if  you  had  not  rejected  the  use  of 
machinery,  the  services  of  which  your  neighbours  had  more 
wisely  appropriated  to  themselves. 


CHAPTER  XXXII 

MALTHUS'S   OPINIONS   ON   RENT 

Although  the  nature  of  rent  has  in  the  former  pages  of  this 
work  been  treated  on  at  some  length,  yet  I  consider  myself 
bound  to  notice  some  opinions  on  the  subject  which  appear  to 
me  erroneous,  and  which  are  the  more  important  as  they  are 
found  in  the  writings  of  one  to  whom,  of  all  men  of  the  present 
day,  some  branches  of  economical  science  are  the  most  indebted. 
Of  Mr.  Malthus's  Essay  on  Population  I  am  happy  in  the 
opportunity  here  afforded  me  of  expressing  my  admiration. 
The  assaults  of  the  opponents  of  this  great  work  have  only 
served  to  prove  its  strength;  and  I  am  persuaded  that  its  just 
reputation  will  spread  with  the  cultivation  of  that  science  of 
which  it  is  so  eminent  an  ornament.  Mr.  Malthus,  too,  has 
satisfactorily  explained  the  principles  of  rent,  and  showed  that 
it  rises  or  falls  in  proportion  to  the  relative  advantages,  either 
of  fertility  or  situation,  of  the  different  lands  in  cultivation,  and 
has  thereby  thrown  much  light  on  many  difficult  points  con- 
nected with  the  subject  of  rent,  which  were  before  either  un- 
known or  very  imperfectly  understood ;  yet  he  appears  to  me 
to  have  fallen  into  some  errors  which  his  authority  makes  it 
the  more  necessary,  whilst  his  characteristic  candour  renders  it 
less  unpleasing,  to  notice.  One  of  these  errors  lies  in  supposing  ^ 
rent  to  be  a  clear  gain  and  a  new  creation  of  riches.  fl 

I  do  not  assent  to  all  the  opinions  of  Mr.  Buchanan  concerning™ 
rent;   but  with  those  expressed  in  the  following  passage,  quoted 
from  his  work  by  Mr.  Malthus,  I  fully  agree,  and  tlierefore  I 
must  dissent  from  Mr.  Malthus's  comment  on  them. 

**  In  this  view  it  (rent)  can  form  no  general  addition  to  the 
stock  of  the  community,  as  the  neat  surplus  in  question  is 
nothing  more  than  a  revenue  transferred  from  one  class  to 
another;  and  from  the  mere  circumstance  of  its  thus  changing 
hands,  it  is  clear  that  no  fund  can  arise  out  of  which  to  pay 
taxes.  The  revenue  which  pays  for  the  produce  of  the  land 
exists  already  in  the  hands  of  tliose  who  purchase  that  produce; 
and  if  the  price  of  subsistence  were  lower,  it  would  still  remain 
in  their  hands,  where  it  would  be  just  as  available  for  taxation 

272 


II 


i 


Malthus  on  Rent  273 

as  when,  by  a  higher  price,  it  is  transferred  to  the  landed 
proprietor." 

After  various  observations  on  the  difference  between  raw 
produce  and  manufactured  commodities,  Mr.  Malthus  asks,  '*  Is 
it  possible,  then,  with  M.  de  Sismondi,  to  regard  rent  as  the  sole 
produce  of  labour,  which  has  a  value  purely  nominal,  and  the 
mere  result  of  that  augmentation  of  price  which  a  seller  obtains 
in  consequence  of  a  peculiar  privilege ;  or,  with  Mr.  Buchanan, 
to  consider  it  as  no  addition  to  the  national  wealth,  but  merely 
a  transfer  of  value,  advantageous  only  to  the  landlords,  and 
proportionably  injurious  to  the  consumers?  "^ 

I  have  already  expressed  my  opinion  on  this  subject  in  treating 
of  rent,  and  have  now  only  further  to  add,  that  rent  is  a  creation 
of  value,  as  I  understand  that  word,  but  not  a  creation  of 
wealth.  If  the  price  of  com,  from  the  difficulty  of  producing 
any  portion  of  it,  should  rise  from  £4  to  £5  per  quarter,  a  million 
of  quarters  will  be  of  the  value  of  £5,000,000  instead  of  £4,000,000, 
and  as  this  corn  will  exchange  not  only  for  more  money,  but  for 
more  of  every  other  commodity,  the  possessors  will  have  a 
greater  amount  of  value;  and  as  no  one  else  will,  in  consequence, 
have  a  less,  the  society  altogether  will  be  possessed  of  greater 
value,  and,  in  that  sense,  rent  is  a  creation  of  value.  But  this 
value  is  so  far  nominal  that  it  adds  nothing  to  the  wealth,  that 
is  to  say,  the  necessaries,  conveniences,  and  enjoyments  of  the 
society.  We  should  have  precisely  the  same  quantity  and  no 
more  of  commodities,  and  the  same  million  quarters  of  corn  as 
before ;  but  the  effect  of  its  being  rated  at  £5  per  quarter  instead 
of  £4  would  be  to  transfer  a  portion  of  the  value  of  the  corn 
and  commodities  from  their  former  possessors  to  the  landlords. 
Rent,  then,  is  a  creation  of  value,  but  not  a  creation  of  wealth; 
it  adds  nothing  to  the  resources  of  a  country;  it  does  not  enable 
it  to  maintain  fleets  and  armies;  for  the  country  would  have 
a  greater  disposable  fund  if  its  land  were  of  a  better  quality, 
and  it  could  employ  the  same  capital  without  generating  a  rent. 

It  must  then  be  admitted  that  Mr.  Sismondi  and  Mr.  Buchanan, 
for  both  their  opinions  are  substantially  the  same,  were  correct 
when  they  considered  rent  as  a  value  purely  nominal,  and  as 
forming  no  addition  to  the  national  wealth,  but  merely  as  a 
transfer  of  value,  advantageous  only  to  the  landlords  and 
proportionably  injurious  to  the  consumer. 

In   another   part   of   Mr.   Malthus 's   Inquiry   he   observes, 
"  that  the  immediate  cause  of  rent  is  obviously  the  excess  of 
^  An  Inquiry  inio  the  Nature  and  Progress  of  Rent,  p.  15. 

S 


274  Political  Economy 

price  above  the  cost  of  production  at  which  raw  produce  sells 
in  the  market;  "  and,  in  another  place,  he  says,  "  that  the 
causes  of  the  high  price  of  raw  produce  may  be  stated  to  be 
three: — 

"  First,  and  mainly,  that  quality  of  the  earth  by  which  it  can 
be  made  to  yield  a  greater  portion  of  the  necessaries  of  life  than  is 
required  for  the  maintenance  of  the  persons  employed  on  the  land. 

"  Secondly,  that  quality  peculiar  to  the  necessaries  of  life,  of 
being  able  to  create  their  own  demand,  or  to  raise  up  a  number 
of  demanders  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of  necessaries 
produced. 

"  And  thirdly,  the  comparative  scarcity  of  the  most  fertile 
land."  In  speaking  of  the  high  price  of  corn,  Mr.  Malthus 
evidently  does  not  mean  the  price  per  quarter  or  per  bushel, 
but  rather  the  excess  of  price  for  which  the  whole  produce  will 
sell  above  the  cost  of  its  production,  including  always  in  the 
term  "  cost  of  its  production  "  profits  as  well  as  wages.  One 
hundred  and  fifty  quarters  of  com  at  £3  10s.  per  quarter  would 
yield  a  larger  rent  to  the  landlord  than  100  quarters  at  £4, 
provided  the  cost  of  production  were  in  both  cases  the  same. 

High  price,  if  the  expression  be  used  in  this  sense,  cannot  then 
be  called  a  cause  of  rent;  it  cannot  be  said  **  that  the  immediate 
cause  of  rent  is  obviously  the  excess  of  price  above  the  cost  of 
production,  at  which  raw  produce  sells  in  the  market,"  for  that 
excess  is  itself  rent.  Rent  Mr.  Malthus  has  defined  to  be 
"  that  portion  of  the  value  of  the  whole  produce  which  remains 
to  the  owner  of  the  land  after  all  the  outgoings  belonging  to 
its  cultivation,  of  whatever  kind,  have  been  paid,  including  the 
profits  of  the  capital  employed,  estimated  according  to  tlie 
usual  and  ordinary  rate  of  the  profits  of  agricultural  stock  at 
the  time  being."  Now,  whatever  sum  this  excess  may  sell  for, 
is  money  rent;  it  is  what  Mr.  Malthus  means  by  **  the  excess 
of  price  above  the  cjost  of  production  at  which  raw  produce  sells 
in  the  market;  "  and,  therefore,  in  an  inquiry  into  the  causes 
which  may  elevate  the  price  of  raw  produce,  compared  with 
the  cost  of  production,  we  are  inquiring  into  the  causes  which 
may  elevate  rent. 

In  reference  to  the  first  cause  which  Mr.  Malthus  has  assigned 
for  the  rise  of  rent,  namely,  "  that  quality  of  the  earth  by  which 
it  can  be  made  to  yield  a  greater  portion  of  the  necessaries  of 
life  than  is  required  for  the  maintenance  of  the  persons  employed 
on  the  land,"  he  makes  the  following  observations:  "We  still 
want  to  know  why  the  consumption  and  supply  are  such  as  to 


Malthus  on  Rent  275 

make  the  price  so  greatly  exceed  the  cost  of  production^  and 
the  main  cause  is  evidently  the  fertility  of  the  earth  in  producing 
the  necessaries  of  life.  Diminish  this  plenty,  diminish  the 
fertility  of  the  soil,  and  the  excess  will  diminish;  diminish  it 
still  further,  and  it  will  disappear."  True,  the  excess  of  neces- 
saries will  diminish  and  disappear,  but  that  is  not  the  question. 
The  question  is,  whether  the  excess  of  their  price  above  the  cost 
of  their  production  will  diminish  and  disappear,  for  it  is  on  this 
that  money  rent  depends.  Is  Mr.  Malthus  warranted  in  his 
inference,  that  because  the  excess  of  quantity  will  diminish  and 
disappear,  therefore  "  the  cause  of  the  high  price  of  the  neces- 
saries of  life  above  the  cost  of  production  is  to  be  found  in  their 
abundance,  rather  than  in  their  scarcity,  and  is  not  only  essenti- 
ally different  from  the  high  price  occasioned  by  artificial  mono- 
polies, but  from  the  high  price  of  those  peculiar  products  of  the 
earth,  not  connected  with  food,  which  may  be  called  natural 
and  necessary  monopolies?  " 

Are  there  no  circumstances  under  which  the  fertility  of  the 
land  and  the  plenty  of  its  produce  may  be  diminished  without 
occasioning  a  diminished  excess  of  its  price  above  the  cost  of 
production,  that  is  to  say,  a  diminished  rent?  If  there  are, 
Mr.  Malthus's  proposition  is  much  too  universal;  for  he  appears 
to  me  to  state  it  as  a  general  principle,  true  under  all  circum- 
stances, that  rent  will  rise  with  the  increased  fertility  of  the 
land,  and  will  fall  with  its  diminished  fertility. 

Mr.  Malthus  would  undoubtedly  be  right  if,  of  any  given  farm, 
in  proportion  as  the  land  yielded  abundantly,  a  greater  share  of 
the  whole  produce  were  paid  to  the  landlord;  but  the  contrary 
is  the  fact;  when  no  other  but  the  most  fertile  land  is  in  culti- 
vation, the  landlord  has  the  smallest  proportion  of  the  whole 
produce,  as  well  as  the  smallest  value,  and  it  is  only  when  inferior 
lands  are  required  to  feed  an  augmenting  population  that  both 
the  landlord's  share  of  the  whole  produce  and  the  value  he 
receives  progressively  increase. 

Suppose  that  the  demand  is  for  a  million  of  quarters  of  com, 
and  that  they  are  the  produce  of  the  land  actually  in  cultivation. 
Now,  suppose  the  fertility  of  all  the  land  to  be  so  diminished 
that  the  very  same  lands  will  yield  only  900,000  quarters.  The 
demand  being  for  a  million  of  quarters,  the  price  of  com  would 
rise,  and  recourse  must  necessarily  be  had  to  land  of  an  inferior 
quality  sooner  than  if  the  superior  land  had  continued  to  produce 
a  million  of  quarters.  But  it  is  this  necessity  of  taking  inferior 
land  into  cultivation  which  is  the  cause  of  the  rise  of  rent,  and 


276  Political  Economy 


1 


will  elevate  it,  although  the  quantity  of  com  received  by  the 
landlord  be  reduced  in  quantity.  Rent,  it  must  be  remembered, 
is  not  in  proportion  to  the  absolute  fertility  of  the  land  in 
cultivation,  but  in  proportion  to  its  relative  fertility.  What- 
ever cause  may  drive  capital  to  inferior  land  must  elevate  rent 
on  the  superior  land;  the  cause  of  rent  being,  as  stated  by 
Mr.  Malthus  in  his  third  proposition,  **  the  comparative  scarcity 
of  the  most  fertile  land."  The  price  of  corn  will  naturally  rise 
with  the  difficulty  of  producing  the  last  portions  of  it,  and  the 
value  of  the  whole  quantity  produced  on  a  particular  farm  will 
be  increased,  although  its  quantity  be  diminished;  but  as  the 
cost  of  production  will  not  increase  on  the  more  fertile  land,  as 
wages  and  profits  taken  together  will  continue  always  of  the 
same  value,^  it  is  evident  that  the  excess  of  price  above  the 
cost  of  production,  or,  in  other  words,  rent,  must  rise  with  the 
diminished  fertility  of  the  land,  unless  it  is  counteracted  by  a 
great  reduction  of  capital,  population,  and  demand.  It  does 
not  appear,  then,  that  ^Ir.  Malthus's  proposition  is  correct: 
rent  does  not  immediately  and  necessarily  rise  or  fall  with  the 
increased  or  diminished  fertility  of  the  land;  but  its  increased 
fertility  renders  it  capable  of  paying  at  some  future  time  an 
augmented  rent.  Land  possessed  of  very  little  fertility  can 
never  bear  any  rent;  land  of  moderate  fertility  may  be  made, 
as  population  increases,  to  bear  a  moderate  rent;  and  land  of 
great  fertility  a  high  rent;  but  it  is  one  thing  to  be  able  to  bear 
a  high  rent,  and  another  thing  actually  to  pay  it.  Rent  may 
be  lower  in  a  country  where  lands  are  exceedingly  fertile  than 
in  a  country  where  they  yield  a  moderate  return,  it  being  in 
proportion  rather  to  relative  than  absolute  fertility — to  th 
value  of  the  produce,  and  not  to  its  abundance.^ 

Mr.  Malthus  supposes  that  the  rent  on  land  yielding  those' 
peculiar  products  of  the  earth  which  may  be  called  natural  and 

*  See  page  70,  where  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  that  whatever  facility 
or  difficulty  there  may  be  in  the  production  of  corn,  wages  and  profits 
together  will  be  of  the  same  value.  When  wages  rise,  it  is  always  at  the 
expense  of  profits,  and  when  they  fall,  profits  always  rise. 

■Mr.  Malthus  has  observed  in' a  late  publication  that  I  have  misunder- 
stood him  in  this  passage,  as  he  did  not  mean  to  say  that  rent  immediately 
and  necessarily  rises  and  falls  with  the  increased  or  diminished  fertility 
of  the  land.  If  so,  I  certainly  did  misunderstand  him.  Mr.  Malthus's 
words  are,  "  Diminish  this  plenty,  diminish  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  and 
the  excess  (rent)  will  diminish;  diminish  it  still  further,  and  it  will  dis- 
appear." Mr.  Malthus  does  not  state  his  proposition  conditionally,  but 
absolutely.  I  contended  against  what  I  understood  him  to  maintain,  that 
a  diminution  of  the  fertility  of  the  soil  was  incompatible  with  an  increase 
of  rent. 


II 


I 


Malthus  on  Rent  277 

necessary  monopolies  is  regulated  by  a  principle  essentially 
different  f  cm  that  which  regulates  the  rent  of  land  that  yields 
the  necessaii^s  of  life.  He  thinks  that  it  is  the  scarcity  of  the 
products  of  the  first  which  is  the  cause  of  a  high  rent,  but  that 
it  is  the  abundance  of  the  latter  which  produces  the  same  effect. 

This  distinction  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  well  founded ;  for 
you  would  as  surely  raise  the  rent  of  land  yielding  scarce  wines, 
as  the  rent  of  corn  land,  by  increasing  the  abundance  of  its 
produce,  if,  at  the  same  time,  the  demand  for  this  peculiar 
commodity  increased ;  and  without  a  similar  increase  of  demand, 
an  abundant  supply  of  com  would  lower  instead  of  raise  the 
rent  of  com  land.  Whatever  the  nature  of  the  land  may  be, 
high  rent  must  depend  on  the  high  price  of  the  produce;  but, 
given  the  high  price,  rent  must  be  high  in  proportion  to 
abundance  and  not  to  scarcity. 

We  are  under  no  necessity  of  producing  permanently  any 
greater  quantity  of  a  commodity  than  that  which  is  demanded. 
If  by  accident  any  greater  quantity  were  produced  it  would  fall 
below  its  natural  price,  and  therefore  would  not  pay  the  cost  of 
production,  including  in  that  cost  the  usual  and  ordinary  profits 
of  stock:  thus  the  supply  would  be  checked  till  it  conformed 
to  the  demand,  and  the  market  price  rose  to  the  natural  price. 

Mr.  Malthus  appears  to  me  to  be  too  much  inclined  to  think 
that  population  is  only  increased  by  the  previous  provision  of 
food — *'  that  it  is  food  that  creates  its  own  demand  " — that 
it  is  by  first  providing  food  that  encouragement  is  given  to 
marriage,  instead  of  considering  that  the  general  progress  of 
population  is  affected  by  the  increase  of  capital,  the  consequent 
demand  for  labour,  and  the  rise  of  wages;  and  that  the 
production  of  food  is  but  the  effect  of  that  demand. 

It  is  by  giving  the  workmen  more  money,  or  any  other  commo- 
dity in  which  wages  are  paid,  and  which  has  not  fallen  in  value, 
that  his  situation  is  improved.  The  increase  of  population 
and  the  increase  of  food  will  generally  be  the  effect,  but  not  the 
necessary  effect,  of  high  wages.  The  amended  condition  of  the 
labourer,  in  consequence  of  the  increased  value  which  is  paid 
him,  does  not  necessarily  oblige  him  to  marry  and  take  upon 
himself  the  charge  of  a  family — he  will,  in  all  probability,  employ 
a  portion  of  his  increased  wages  in  furnishing  himself  abundantly 
with  food  and  necessaries — but  with  the  remainder  he  may,  if 
it  please  him,  purchase  any  commodities  that  may  contribute 
to  his  enjoyments — chairs,  tables,  and  hardware;  or  better 
clothes,  sugar,  and  tobacco.    His  increased  wages,  then,  will  be 


1 


278  Political  Economy 

attended  with  no  other  effect  than  an  increased  demand  for  some 
of  those  commodities;  and  as  the  race  of  labourers  will  not  be 
materially  increased,  his  wages  will  continue  permanently  high. 
But  although  this  might  be  the  consequence  of  high  wages,  yet 
so  great  are  the  delights  of  domestic  society,  that,  in  practice, 
it  is  invariably  found  that  an  increase  of  population  follows  the 
amended  condition  of  the  labourer;  and  it  is  only  because  it 
does  so,  that,  with  the  trifling  exception  already  mentioned,  a 
new  and  increased  demand  arises  for  food.  This  demand,  then, 
is  the  effect  of  an  increase  of  capital  and  population,  but  not  the 
cause — it  is  only  because  the  expenditure  of  the  people  takes 
this  direction,  that  the  market  price  of  necessaries  exceeds  the 
natural  price,  and  that  the  quantity  of  food  required  is  pro- 
duced ;  and  it  is  because  the  number  of  people  is  increased  that 
wages  again  fall. 

What  motive  can  a  farmer  have  to  produce  more  corn  than  is 
actually  demanded,  when  the  consequence  would  be  a  depression 
of  its  market  price  below  its  natural  price,  and  consequently 
a  privation  to  him  of  a  portion  of  his  profits,  by  reducing  them 
below  the  general  rate.?  "If,"  says  Mr.  Malthus,  "the  neces- 
saries of  life,  the  most  important  products  of  land,  had  not  the 
property  of  creating  an  increase  of  demand  proportioned  to 
their  increased  quantity,  such  increased  quantity  would  occasion 
a  fall  in  their  exchangeable  value.^  However  abundant  might 
be  the  produce  of  the  country,  its  population  might  remain 
stationary;  and  this  abundance  without  a  proportionate  demand, 
and  with  a  very  high  corn  price  of  labour,  which  would  naturally 
take  place  under  these  circumstances,  might  reduce  the  price 
of  raw  produce,  like  the  price  of  manufactures,  to  the  cost  of^i 
production."  Il 

Might  reduce  the  price  of  raw  produce  to  the  cost  of  production.  ™ 
Is  it  ever  for  any  length  of  time  either  above  or  below  this  price? 
Does  not  Mr.  Malthus  himself  state  it  never  to  be  so  ?  "I  hope," 
he  says,  "to  be  excused  for  dwelling  a  little,  and  presenting  to 
the  reader,  in  various  forms,  the  doctrine  that  com,  in  reference 
to  the  quantity  actually  produced,  is  sold  at  its  necessary  price 
like  manufactures,  because  I  consider  it  as  a  truth  of  the  highest 
importance,  which  has  been  overlooked  by  the  economists,  by 
Adam  Smith,  and  all  those  writers,  who  have  represented  raw 
produce  as  selling  always  at  a  monopoly  price." 

^  Of  what  increased  quantity  does  Mr.  Malthus  speak  ?  Who  is  to 
produce  it?  Who  can  have  any  motive  to  produce  it  before  any  demand 
exists  for  an  additional  quantity? 


fl 


Malthus  on  Rent  279 

"  Every  extensive  country  may  thus  be  considered  as  possess- 
ing a  gradation  of  machines  for  the  production  of  corn  and  raw 
materials,  including  in  this  gradation  not  only  all  the  various 
qualities  of  poor  land,  of  which  every  territory  has  generally  an 
abundance,  but  the  inferior  machinery,  which  may  be  said  to  be 
employed  when  good  land  is  further  and  further  forced  for  addi- 
tional produce.  As  the  price  of  raw  produce  continues  to  rise, 
these  inferior  machines  are  successively  called  into  action;  and 
as  the  price  of  raw  produce  continues  to  fall,  they  are  successively 
thrown  out  of  action.  The  illustration  here  used  serves  to  show 
at  once  the  necessity  of  the  actual  price  of  corn  to  the  actual  produce, 
and  the  different  effect  which  would  attend  a  great  reduction 
in  the  price  of  any  particular  manufacture,  and  a  great  reduction 
in  the  price  of  raw  produce."  ^ 

How  are  these  passages  to  be  reconciled  to  that  which  affirms, 
that  if  the  necessaries  of  life  had  not  the  property  of  creating  an 
increase  of  demand  proportioned  to  their  increased  quantity,  the 
abundant  quantity  produced  would  then,  and  then  only,  reduce 
the  price  of  raw  produce  to  the  cost  of  production?  If  com  is 
never  under  its  natural  price,  it  is  never  more  abundant  than 
the  actual  population  require  it  to  be  for  their  own  consumption; 
no  store  can  be  laid  up  for  the  consumption  of  others;  it  can 
never,  then,  by  its  cheapness  and  abundance,  be  a  stimulus  to 
population.  In  proportion  as  com  can  be  produced  cheaply, 
the  increased  wages  of  the  labourers  will  have  more  power  to 
maintain  families.  In  America  population  increases  rapidly 
because  food  can  be  produced  at  a  cheap  price,  and  not  because 
an  abundant  supply  has  been  previously  provided.  In  Europe 
population  increases  comparatively  slowly,  because  food  cannot 
be  produced  at  a  cheap  value.    In  the  usual  and  ordinary  course 

^  Inquiry',  etc.  "  In  all  progressive  countries  the  average  price  of  com 
is  never  higher  than  what  is  necessary  to  continue  the  average  increase  of 
produce." — Observations,  p.  21. 

"  In  the  employment  of  fresh  capital  upon  the  land,  to  provide  for  the 
wants  of  an  increasing  population,  whether  this  fresh  capital  is  employed 
in  bringing  more  land  under  the  plough,  or  improving  land  already  in 
cultivation,  the  main  question  always  depends  upon  the  expected  returns 
of  this  capital;  and  no  part  of  the  gross  profits  can  be  diminished  without 
diminishing  the  motive  to  this  mode  of  employing  it.  Every  diminution 
of  price  not  fully  and  immediately  balanced  by  a  proportionate  fall  in  all 
the  necessary  expenses  of  a  farm,  every  tax  on  the  land,  every  tax  on 
farming  stock,  every  tax  on  the  necessaries  of  farmers,  will  tell  in  the 
computation;  and  if,  after  all  these  outgoings  are  allowed  for,  the  price 
of  the  produce  will  not  leave  a  fair  remuneration  for  the  capital  employed, 
according  to  the  general  rate  of  profits,  and  a  rent  at  least  equal  to  the 
rent  of  the  land  in  its  former  state,  no  sufficient  motive  can  exist  to  under- 
take the  projected  improvement." — Observations,  p.  22. 


28o  Political  Economy 

of  things  the  demand  for  all  commodities  precedes  their  supply. 
By  saying  that  com  would,  like  manufactures,  sink  to  its  price 
of  production,  if  it  could  not  raise  up  demanders,  Mr.  Malthus 
cannot  mean  that  all  rent  would  be  absorbed;  for  he  has 
himself  justly  remarked  that  if  all  rent  were  given  up  by  the 
landlords  corn  would  not  fall  in  price;  rent  being  the  effect 
and  not  the  cause  of  high  price,  and  there  being  always  one 
quality  of  land  in  cultivation  which  pays  no  rent  whatever, 
the  com  from  which  replaces  by  its  price  only  wages  and 
profits. 

In  the  following  passage,  Mr.  Malthus  has  given  an  able 
exposition  of  the  causes  of  the  rise  in  the  price  of  raw  produce 
in  rich  and  progressive  countries,  in  every  word  of  which  I  concur; 
but  it  appears  to  me  to  be  at  variance  with  some  of  the  proposi- 
tions maintained  by  him  in  his  essay  on  rent.  "  I  have  no 
hesitation  in  stating  that,  independently  of  the  irregularities 
in  the  currency  of  a  country,  and  other  temporary  and  accidental 
circumstances,  the  cause  of  the  high  comparative  money  price 
of  com  is  its  high  comparative  real  price,  or  the  greater  quantity 
of  capital  and  labour  which  must  be  employed  to  produce  it; 
and  that  the  reasons  why  the  real  price  of  com  is  higher,  and 
continually  rising  in  countries  which  are  already  rich  and  still 
advancing  in  prosperity  and  population,  is  to  be  found  in  the 
necessity  of  resorting  constantly  to  poorer  land,  to  machines 
which  require  a  greater  expenditure  to  work  them,  and  which 
consequently  occasion  each  fresh  addition  to  the  raw  produce 
of  the  country  to  be  purchased  at  a  greater  cost;  in  short,  it 
is  to  be  found  in  the  important  tmth  that  corn  in  a  progressive 
country  is  sold  at  a  price  necessary  to  yield  the  actual  supply; 
and  that,  as  this  supply  becomes  more  and  more  difficult,  the 
price  rises  in  proportion." 

The  real  price  of  a  commodity  is  here  properly  stated  to  depend 
on  the  greater  or  less  quantity  of  labour  and  capital  (that  is, 
accumulated  labour)  which  must  be  employed  to  produce  it. 
Real  price  does  not,  as  some  have  contended,  depend  on  money 
value;  nor,  as  others  have  said,  on  value  relatively  to  com, 
labour,  or  any  other  commodity  taken  singly,  or  to  all  commo- 
dities collectively;  but,  as  Mr.  Malthus  justly  says,  "on  the 
greater  (or  less)  quantity  of  capital  and  labour  which  must  be 
employed  to  produce  it." 

Among  the  causes  of  the  rise  of  rent,  Mr.  Malthus  mentions, 
"  such  an  increase  of  population  as  will  lower  the  wages  of  labour." 
But  if,  as  the  wages  of  labour  fall,  the  profits  of  stock  rise,  and  they 


1 


I 


Malthus  on  Rent  281 

be  together  always  of  the  same  value,^  no  fall  of  wages  can  raise 
rent,  for  it  will  neither  diminish  the  portion  nor  the  value  of  the 
portion  of  the  produce  which  will  be  allotted  to  the  farmer  and 
labourer  together;  and,  therefore,  will  not  leave  a  larger  portion 
nor  a  larger  value  for  the  landlord.  In  proportion  as  less  is 
appropriated  for  wages,  more  will  be  appropriated  for  profits, 
and  vice  versa.  This  division  will  be  settled  by  the  farmer  and 
his  labourers  without  any  interference  of  the  landlord;  and, 
indeed,  it  is  a  matter  in  which  he  can  have  no  interest,  otherwise 
than  as  one  division  may  be  more  favourable  than  another,  to  new 
accumulations,  and  to  a  further  demand  for  land.  If  wages  fell, 
profits,  and  not  rent,  would  rise.  If  wages  rose,  profits,  and  not 
rent,  would  fall.  The  rise  of  rent  and  wages,  and  the  fall  of 
profits,  are  generally  the  inevitable  effects  of  the  same  cause — 
the  increasing  demand  for  food,  the  increased  quantity  of  labour 
required  to  produce  it,  and  its  consequently  high  price.  If  the 
landlord  were  to  forego  this  whole  rent,  the  labourers  would  not 
be  in  the  least  benefited.  If  it  were  possible  for  the  labourers 
to  give  up  their  whole  wages,  the  landlords  would  derive  no 
advantage  from  such  a  circumstance;  but  in  both  cases  the 
farmers  would  receive  and  retain  all  which  they  relinquish. 
It  has  been  my  endeavour  to  show  in  this  work  that  a  fall  of 
wages  would  have  no  other  effect  than  to  raise  profits.  Every 
rise  of  profits  is  favourable  to  the  accumulation  of  capital,  and 
to  the  further  increase  of  population,  and  therefore  would,  in  all 
probability,  ultimately  lead  to  an  increase  of  rent. 

Another  cause  of  the  rise  of  rent,  according  to  Mr.  Malthus,  is 
"  such  agricultural  improvements  or  such  increase  of  exertions 
as  will  diminish  the  number  of  labourers  necessary  to  produce 
a  given  effect."  To  this  passage  I  have  the  same  objection 
that  I  had  against  that  which  speaks  of  the  increased  fertility 
of  land  being  the  cause  of  an  immediate  rise  of  rent.  Both  the 
improvement  in  agriculture,  and  the  superior  fertility,  will  give 
to  the  land  a  capability  of  bearing  at  some  future  period  a  higher 
rent,  because  with  the  same  price  of  food  there  will  be  a  great 
additional  quantity;  but  till  the  increase  of  population  be  in  the 
same  proportion,  the  additional  quantity  of  food  would  not  be 
required,  and,  therefore,  rents  would  be  lowered  and  not  raised. 
The  quantity  that  could  under  the  then  existing  circumstances 
be  consumed  could  be  furnished  either  with  fewer  hands,  or 
with  a  less  quantity  of  land,  the  price  of  raw  produce  would  fall, 
and  capital  would  be  withdrawn  from  the  land.*  Nothing  can 
*  Sc«  p.  72.  '  See  pag€  44,  etc. 


tv,  ofl' 


282  Political  Economy 

raise  rent  but  a  demand  for  new  land  of  an  inferior  quality,  01 
some  cause  which  shall  occasion  an  alteration  in  the  relative 
fertility  of  the  land  already  under  cultivation.^  Improvements 
in  agriculture,  and  in  the  division  of  labour,  are  common  to  all 
land;  they  increase  the  absolute  quantity  of  raw  produce 
obtained  from  each,  but  probably  do  not  much  disturb  the 
relative  proportions  which  before  existed  between  them. 

Mr.  Malthus  has  justly  commented  on  the  error  of  Dr.  Smith's 
argument,  that  corn  is  of  so  peculiar  a  nature  that  its  production 
cannot  be  encouraged  by  the  same  means  that  the  production 
of  all  other  commodities  is  encouraged.  He  observes,  "  It  is  by 
no  means  intended  to  deny  the  powerful  influence  of  the  price 
of  com  upon  the  price  of  labour,  on  an  average  of  a  considerable 
number  of  years;  but  that  this  influence  is  not  such  as  to  prevent 
the  movement  of  capital  to  or  from  the  land,  which  is  the  precise 
point  in  question,  will  be  made  sufficiently  evident  by  a  short 
inquiry  into  the  manner  in  which  labour  is  paid  and  brought 
into  the  market,  and  by  a  consideration  of  the  consequences  to 
which  the  assumption  of  Adam  Smith's  proposition  would 
inevitably  lead."  ^ 

Mr.  Malthus  then  proceeds  to  show  that  demand  and  high 
price  will  as  effectually  encourage  the  production  of  raw  produce 
as  the  demand  and  high  price  of  any  other  commodity  will 
encourage  its  production.  In  this  view  it  will  be  seen,  from 
what  I  have  said  of  the  effects  of  bounties,  that  I  entirely  concur. 
I  have  noticed  the  passage  from  Mr.  Malthus's  Observations  on 
the  Corn  Laws,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  in  what  a  different 

*  It  is  not  necessary  to  state  on  every  occasion,  but  it  must  be  always 
understood,  that  the  same  results  wall  follow,  as  far  as  regards  the  price 
of  raw  produce  and  the  rise  of  rents,  whether  an  additional  capital  of  a 
given  amount  be  employed  on  new  land,  for  which  no  rent  is  paid,  or  on 
land  already  in  cultivation,  if  the  produce  obtained  from  both  be  precisely 
the  same  in  quantity. — See  p.  37. 

M.  Say,  in  his  notes  to  the  French  translation  of  this  work,  has 
endeavoured  to  show  that  there  is  not  at  any  time  land  in  cultivation 
which  does  not  pay  a  rent,  and  having  satisfied  himself  on  this  point,  he 
concludes  that  he  has  overturned  all  the  conclusions  which  result  from  that 
doctrine.  He  infers,  for  example,  that  I  am  not  correct  in  saying  that 
taxes  on  corn  and  other  raw  produce,  by  elevating  their  price,  fall  on  the 
consumer,  and  do  not  fall  on  rent.  He  contends  that  such  taxes  must  fall 
on  rent.  But  before  M.  Say  can  establish  the  correctness  of  this  inference, 
he  must  also  show  that  there  is  not  any  capital  employed  on  the  land  for 
which  no  rent  is  paid  (see  the  beginning  of  this  note,  and  pages  33  and  38 
of  the  present  work) ;  now  this  he  has  not  attempted  to  do.  In  no  part  of 
his  notes  has  he  refuted  or  even  noticed  that  important  doctrine.  By 
his  note  to  page  182  of  the  second  volume  of  the  French  edition,  he  does 
not  appear  to  be  aware  that  it  has  even  been  advanced. 

*  Observations  on  the  Corn  Law;:,  p.  4. 


i 


Malthus  on  Rent  283 

sense  the  term  real  price  is  used  here,  and  in  his  other  pamphlet, 
entitled  Grounds  of  an  Opinion,  etc.  In  this  passage  Mr.  Malthus 
tells  us  that  "  it  is  clearly  an  increase  of  real  price  alone  which 
can  encourage  the  production  of  com,"  and,  by  real  price,  he 
evidently  means  the  increase  in  its  value  relatively  to  all  other 
things,  or,  in  other  words,  the  rise  in  its  market  above  its  natural 
price,  or  the  cost  of  its  production.  If  by  real  price  this  is  what 
is  meant,  although  I  do  not  admit  the  propriety  of  thus  naming 
it,  Mr.  Malthus's  opinion  is  undoubtedly  correct;  it  is  the  rise 
in  the  market  price  of  corn  which  alone  encourages  its  production ; 
for  it  may  be  laid  down  as  a  principle  uniformly  true  that  the 
only  great  encouragement  to  the  increased  production  of  a  commo- 
dity is  its  market  value  exceeding  its  natural  or  necessary  value. 

But  this  is  not  the  meaning  which  Mr.  Malthus,  on  other 
occasions,  attaches  to  the  term  real  price.  In  the  essay  on  rent 
Mr.  Malthus  says,  by  "  the  real  growing  price  of  corn  I  mean  the 
real  quantity  of  labour  and  capital  which  has  been  employed  to 
produce  the  last  additions  which  have  been  made  to  the  national 
produce."  In  another  part  he  states  "  the  cause  of  the  high 
comparative  real  price  of  corn  to  be  the  greater  quantity  of 
capital  and  labour  which  must  be  employed  to  produce  it."  ^ 
Suppose  that,  in  the  foregoing  passage,  we  were  to  substitute 
this  definition  of  real  price,  would  it  not  then  run  thus? — "  It 
is  clearly  the  increase  in  the  quantity  of  labour  and  capital 
which  must  be  employed  to  produce  corn,  which  alone  can 
encourage  its  production."  This  would  be  to  say,  that  it  is 
clearly  the  rise  in  the  natural  or  necessary  price  of  com  which 
encourages  its  production — a  proposition  which  could  not  be 
maintained.  It  is  not  the  price  at  which  corn  can  be  produced 
that  has  any  influence  on  the  quantity  produced,  but  the  price 
at  which  it  can  be  sold.  It  is  in  proportion  to  the  degree  of  the 
difference  of  its  price  above  or  below  the  cost  of  production 
that  capital  is  attracted  to  or  repelled  from  the  land.  If  that 
excess  be  such  as  to  give  to  capital  so  employed  a  greater  than 
the  general  profit  of  stock,  capital  will  go  to  the  land ;  if  less,  it 
will  be  withdrawn  from  it. 

It  is  not,  then,  by  an  alteration  in  the  real  price  of  com  that  its 
production  is  encouraged,  but  by  an  alteration  in  its  market 

*  Upon  showing  this  passage  to  Mr.  Malthus,  at  the  time  when  these 
papers  were  going  to  the  press,  he  observed,  "  that  in  these  two  instances 
he  had  inadvertently  used  the  term  real  price,  instead  of  cost  of  production. 
It  will  be  seen,  from  what  I  have  already  said,  that  to  me  it  appears  that 
in  these  two  instances  he  has  used  the  term  real  price  in  its  true  and  just 
acceptation,  and  that  in  the  former  case  only  it  is  incorrectly  applied. 


1 


284  Political  Economy 

price.  It  is  not  "  because  a  greater  quantity  of  capital 
labour  must  be  employed  to  produce  it  (Mr.  Malthus's  just 
definition  of  real  price)  that  more  capital  and  labour  are 
attracted  to  the  land,  but  because  the  market  price  rises  above 
this,  its  real  price,  and,  notwithstanding  the  increased  charge, 
makes  the  cultivation  of  land  the  more  profitable  employment 
of  capital." 

Nothing  can  be  more  just  than  the  following  observations 
of  Mr.  Malthus  on  Adam  Smith's  standard  of  value.  "  Adam 
Smith  was  evidently  led  into  this  train  of  argument  from  his 
habit  of  considering  labour  as  the  standard  measure  of  value  and 
corn  as  the  measure  of  labour.  But  that  corn  is  a  very  inaccu- 
rate measure  of  labour  the  history  of  our  own  country  will  amply 
demonstrate;  where  labour,  compared  with  com,  will  be  found 
to  have  experienced  very  great  and  striking  variations,  not  only 
from  year  to  year,  but  from  century  to  century,  and  for  ten, 
twenty,  and  thirty  years  together.  And  that  neither  labour  nor 
any  other  commodity  can  be  an  accurate  measure  of  real  value  in 
exchange  is  now  considered  as  one  of  the  most  incontrovertible 
doctrines  of  political  economy,  and,  indeed,  follows  from  the 
very  definition  of  value  in  exchange." 

If  neither  com  nor  labour  are  accurate  measures  of  real  value 
in  exchange,  which  they  clearly  are  not,  what  other  commodity 
is} — certainly  none.  If,  then,  the  expression,  real  price  of 
commodities,  have  any  meaning,  it  must  be  that  which  Mr. 
Malthus  has  stated  in  the  essay  on  rent — it  must  be  measured 
by  the  proportionate  quantity  of  capital  and  labour  necessarj^. 
to  produce  them.  ■I 

In  Mr.  Malthus's  Inquiry  into  iJie  Nature  of  Rent,  he  says^' 
"  that,  independently  of  irregularities  in  the  currency  of  a 
country,  and  other  temporary  and  accidental  circumstances, 
the  cause  of  the  high  comparative  money  price  of  com  is  its 
high  comparative  real  price,  or  the  greater  quantity  of  capital  and 
labour  which  must  be  employed  to  produce  it.''  ^ 

This,  I  apprehend,  is  the  correct  account  of  all  permanent 
variations  in  price,  whether  of  com  or  of  any  other  commodity. 
A  commodity  can  only  permanently  rise  in  price  either  because 
a  greater  quantity  of  capital  and  labour  must  be  employed  to 
produce  it,  or  because  money  has  fallen  in  value;  and,  on  the 
contrary,  it  can  only  fall  in  price,  either  because  a  less  quantity 
of  capital  and  labour  may  be  employed  to  produce  it,  or  because 
money  has  risen  in  value. 

*  Page  40. 


I 


Malthus  on  Rent  285 

A  variation  arising  from  the  latter  of  these  alternatives,  an 
altered  value  of  money,  is  common  at  once  to  all  commodities; 
but  a  variation  arising  from  the  former  cause  is  confined  to  the 
particular  commodity  requiring  more  or  less  labour  in  its  pro- 
duction. By  allowing  the  free  importation  of  corn,  or  by  im- 
provements in  agriculture,  raw  produce  would  fall ;  but  the  price 
of  no  other  commodity  would  be  affected,  except  in  proportion 
to  the  fall  in  the  real  value,  or  cost  of  production,  of  the  raw 
produce  which  entered  into  its  composition. 

Mr.  Malthus,  having  acknowledged  this  principle,  cannot,  I 
think,  consistently  maintain  that  the  whole  money  value  of  all 
the  commodities  in  the  country  must  sink  exactly  in  proportion 
to  the  fall  in  the  price  of  corn.  If  the  corn  consumed  in  the 
country  were  of  the  value  of  10  millions  per  annum,  and  the 
manufactured  and  foreign  commodities  consumed  were  of  the 
value  of  20  millions,  making  altogether  30  millions,  it  would  not 
be  admissible  to  infer  that  the  annual  expenditure  was  reduced 
to  15  millions  because  corn  had  fallen  50  per  cent.,  or  from 
10  to  5  millions. 

The  value  of  the  raw  produce  which  entered  into  the  com- 
position of  these  manufactures  might  not,  for  example,  exceed 
30  per  cent,  of  their  whole  value,  and,  therefore,  the  fall  in  the 
value  of  manufactured  commodities,  instead  of  being  from  20  to 
10  millions,  would  be  only  from  20  to  18  millions;  and  after 
the  fall  in  the  price  of  corn  of  50  per  cent,,  the  whole  amount  of 
the  annual  expenditure,  instead  of  falling  from  30  to  15  millions, 
would  fall  from  30  to  23  millions.^ 

This,  I  say,  would  be  their  value  if  you  supposed  it  possible 
that  with  such  a  cheap  price  of  corn  no  more  corn  and  com- 
modities would  be  consumed ;  but  as  all  those  who  had  employed 
capital  in  the  production  of  corn  on  those  lands  which  would 
no  longer  be  cultivated  could  employ  it  in  the  production  of 
manufactured  goods,  and  only  a  part  of  those  manufactured 
goods  would  be  given  in  exchange  for  foreign  corn,  as  on  any 
other  supposition  no  advantage  would  be  gained  by  importation 
and  low  prices,  we  should  have  the  additional  value  of  all  that 
quantity  of  manufactured  goods  which  were  so  produced  and 
not  exported  to  add  to  the  above  value,  so  that  the  real  diminu- 
tion, even  in  money  value,  of  all  the  commodities  in  the  country, 

^  Manufactures,  indeed,  could  not  fall  in  any  such  proportion,  because, 
under  the  circumstances  supposed,  there  would  be  a  new  distribution  of 
the  precious  metals  among  the  different  countries.  Our  cheap  com- 
modities would  be  exported  in  exchange  for  corn  and  gold,  till  the  accumula- 
tion of  gold  should  lower  its  value  and  raise  the  money  price  of  conmioditiesi 


IlorosT 


286  Political  Economy 

corn  included,  would  be  equal  only  to  the  loss  of  the  landloi 
by  the  reduction  of  their  rents,  while  the  quantity  of  objects  of 
enjoyment  would  be  greatly  increased. 

Instead  of  thus  considering  the  effect  of  a  fall  in  the  value  of 
raw  produce,  as  Mr.  Malthus  was  bound  to  do  by  his  previous 
admission,  he  considers  it  as  precisely  the  same  thing  as  a  rise 
of  100  per  cent,  in  the  value  of  money,  and,  therefore,  argues 
as  if  all  commodities  would  sink  to  half  their  former  price. 

"  During  the  twenty  years  beginning  with  1794,"  he  says, 
"  and  ending  with  1813,  the  average  price  of  British  com  per 
quarter  was  about  83  shillings;  during  the  ten  years  ending 
with  1813,  92  shillings;  and  during  the  last  five  years  of  the 
twenty,  108  shillings.  In  the  course  of  these  twenty  years,  the 
government  borrowed  near  500  millions  of  real  capital;  for 
which,  on  a  rough  average,  exclusive  of  the  sinking  fund,  it 
engaged  to  pay  about  5  per  cent.  But  if  com  should  fall  to 
50  shillings  a  quarter,  and  other  commodities  in  proportion, 
instead  of  an  interest  of  about  5  per  cent.,  the  government 
would  really  pay  an  interest  of  7,  8,  9,  and,  for  the  last  200 
millions,  10  per  cent. 

"  To  this  extraordinary^  generosity  towards  the  stockholders  I 
should  be  disposed  to  make  no  kind  of  objection,  if  it  were  not 
necessary  to  consider  by  whom  it  is  to  be  paid ;  and  a  moment's 
reflection  will  show  us  that  it  can  only  be  paid  by  the  industrious 
classes  of  society  and  the  landlords,  that  is,  by  all  those  whose 
nominal  income  will  vary  with  the  variations  in  the  measure 
of  value.  The  nominal  revenues  of  this  part  of  the  society, 
compared  with  the  average  of  the  last  five  years,  will  be  dimin- 
ished one  half,  and  out  of  this  nominally  reduced  income  thelM'J 
will  have  to  pay  the  same  nominal  amount  of  taxes."  ^  ^] 

In  the  first  place,  I  think  I  have  already  shown  that  even  the 
value  of  the  gross  income  of  the  whole  country  will  not  be 
diminished  in  the  proportion  for  which  Mr.  Malthus  here  con- 
tends; it  would  not  follow  that  because  com  fell  50  per  cent, 
each  man's  gross  income  would  be  reduced  50  per  cent,  in  value;  ^ 
his  net  income  might  be  actually  increased  in  value. 

In  the  second  place,  I  think  the  reader  will  agree  with  me  that 
the  increased  charge,  if  admitted,  would  not  fall  exclusively  "  on 
tlie  landlords  and  the  industrious  classes  of  society;  "  the  stock- 
holder, by  his  expenditure,  contributes  his  share  to  the  support 

*  The  Grounds  of  an  Opinion,  etc.,  p.  36. 

'  Mr.  Malthus,  in  another  part  of  the  same  work,  supposes  commodities 
to  vary  25  or  20  per  cent,  when  com  varies  333. 


II 


Malthus  on  Rent  287 

of  the  public  burdens  in  the  same  way  as  the  other  classes  of 
society.  If,  then,  money  became  really  more  valuable,  although 
he  would  receive  a  greater  value,  he  would  also  pay  a  greater 
value  in  taxes,  and,  therefore,  it  cannot  be  true  that  the  whole 
addition  to  the  real  value  of  the  interest  would  be  paid  by  "  the 
landlords  and  the  industrious  classes." 

The  whole  argument,  however,  of  Mr.  Malthus,  is  built  on  an 
infirm  basis:  it  supposes,  because  the  gross  income  of  the 
country  is  diminished,  that,  therefore,  the  net  income  must  also 
be  diminished  in  the  same  proportion.  It  has  been  one  of  the 
objects  of  this  work  to  show  that,  with  every  fall  in  the  real 
value  of  necessaries,  the  wages  of  labour  would  fall,  and  that 
the  profits  of  stock  would  rise ;  in  other  words,  that  of  any  given 
annual  value  a  less  portion  would  be  paid  to  the  labouring  class, 
and  a  larger  portion  to  those  whose  funds  employed  this  class. 
Suppose  the  value  of  the  commodities  produced  in  a  particular 
manufacture  to  be  £1000,  and  to  be  divided  between  the  master 
and  his  labourers  in  the  proportion  of  £800  to  labourers  and 
£200  to  the  master;  if  the  value  of  these  commodities  should 
fall  to  £900,  and  £ioo  be  saved  from  the  wages  of  labour,  in 
consequence  of  the  fall  of  necessaries,  the  net  income  of  the 
master  would  be  in  no  degree  impaired,  and,  therefore,  he  could 
with  just  as  much  facility  pay  the  same  amount  of  taxes  after 
as  before  the  reduction  of  price.^ 

It  is  of  importance  to  distinguish  clearly  between  gross  revenue 

and  net  revenue,  for  it  is  from  the  net  revenue  of  a  society  that 

all  taxes  must  be  paid.     Suppose  that  all  the  commodities  in 

the  country,  all  the  com,  raw  produce,  manufactured  goods, 

etc.,  which  could  be  brought  to  market  in  the  course  of  the  year, 

were  of  the  value  of  20  millions,  and  that  in  order  to  obtain  this 

value  the  labour  of  a  certain  number  of  men  was  necessary, 

and  that  the  absolute  necessaries  of  these  labourers  required  an 

expenditure  of  10  millions;  I  should  say  that  the  gross  revenue 

of  such  society  was  20  millions,  and  its  net  revenue  10  millions. 

It  does  not  follow  from  this  supposition  that  the  labourers 

should  receive  only  10  millions  for  their  labour;    they  might 

receive  12,  14,  or  15  millions,  and  in  that  case  they  would  have 

*  Of  net  produce  and  gross  produce  M.  Say  speaks  as  follows:  "  The 
whole  value  produced  is  the  gross  produce;  this  value,  after  deducting 
from  it  the  cost  of  production,  is  the  net  produce." — Vol.  ii.  p,  491.  There 
can,  then,  be  no  net  produce,  because  the  cost  of  production,  according  to 
M.  Say,  consists  of  rent,  wages,  and  profits.  In  page  508  he  says,  "  The 
value  of  a  product,  the  value  of  a  productive  service,  the  value  of  the  cost 
of  production,  are  all,  then,  similar  values,  whenever  things  are  left  to 
their  natural  course."    Take  a  whole  from  a  whole  and  nothing  remains. 


1 

dividec^ 


288  Political  Economy 

2,  4,  or  5  millions  of  the  net  income.  The  rest  would  be  divide 
between  landlords  and  capitalists;  but  the  whole  net  income 
would  not  exceed  10  millions.  Suppose  such  a  society  paid 
2  millions  in  taxes,  its  net  income  would  be  reduced  to  8  millions. 

Suppose  now  money  to  become  more  valuable  by  one-tenth, 
all  commodities  would  fall,  and  the  price  of  labour  would  fall, 
because  the  absolute  necessaries  of  the  labourer  formed  a  part 
of  those  commodities,  consequently  the  gross  income  would  be 
reduced  to  18  millions  and  the  net  income  to  9  millions.  If  the 
taxes  fell  in  the  same  proportion,  and,  instead  of  2  millions, 
£1,800,000  only  were  raised,  the  net  income  would  be  further 
reduced  to  £7,200,000,  precisely  of  the  same  value  as  the 
8  millions  were  before,  and  therefore  the  society  would  neither 
be  losers  nor  gainers  by  such  an  event.  But  suppose  that  after 
the  rise  of  money,  2  millions  were  raised  for  taxes  as  before, 
the  society  would  be  poorer  by  £200,000  per  annum,  their  taxes 
would  be  really  raised  one-ninth.  To  alter  the  money  value  of 
commodities,  by  altering  the  value  of  money,  and  yet  to  raise 
the  same  money  amount  by  taxes,  is  then  undoubtedly  to  increase 
the  burthens  of  society. 

But  suppose  of  the  10  millions  net  revenue  the  landlords 
received  five  millions  as  rent,  and  that  by  facility  of  production, 
or  by  the  importation  of  corn,  the  necessary  cost  of  that  article 
in  labour  was  reduced  i  million,  rent  would  fall  i  million,  and 
the  prices  of  the  mass  of  commodities  would  also  fall  to  the  same 
amount,  but  the  net  revenue  would  be  just  as  great  as  before; 
the  gross  income  would,  it  is  true,  be  only  19  millions,  and  t 
necessary  expenditure  to  obtain  it  9  millions,  but  the  net  inco 
would  be  10  millions.  Now,  suppose  2  millions  raised  in  tax 
on  this  diminished  gross  income,  would  the  society  altogethi 
be  richer  or  poorer.'*  Richer,  certainly;  for  after  the  paymen 
of  their  taxes,  they  would  have,  as  before,  a  clear  income  of 
8  millions  to  bestow  on  the  purchase  of  commodities,  which  had 
increased  in  quantity,  and  fallen  in  price,  in  the  proportion  of 
20  to  19;  not  only  then  could  the  same  taxation  be  endured, 
but  greater,  and  yet  the  mass  of  the  people  be  better  provided 
with  conveniences  and  necessaries. 

If  the  net  income  of  the  society,  after  paying  the  same  money 
taxation,  be  as  great  as  before,  and  the  class  of  landholders  lose 
I  million  from  a  fall  of  rent,  the  other  productive  classes  must 
have  increased  money  incomes,  notwithstanding  the  fall  of 
prices.  The  capitalist  will  then  be  doubly  benefited  ;^  the  corn 
and  butcher's  meat  consumed  by  himself  and  his  family  will  be 


Te; 

I 

enr 


I 


Malthus  on  Rent  289 

reduced  in  price;  and  the  wages  of  his  menial  servants,  of  his 
gardeners,  and  labourers  of  all  descriptions,  will  be  also  lowered. 
His  horses  and  cattle  will  cost  less,  and  be  supported  at  a  less 
expense.  All  the  commodities  in  which  raw  produce  enters  as 
a  principal  part  of  their  value  will  fall.  This  aggregate  amount 
of  savings,  made  on  the  expenditure  of  income,  at  the  same  time 
that  his  money  income  is  increased,  will  then  be  doubly  bene- 
ficial to  him,  and  will  enable  him  not  only  to  add  to  his  enjoy- 
ments, but  to  bear  additional  taxes,  if  they  should  be  required: 
his  additional  consumption  of  taxed  commodities  will  much 
more  than  make  up  for  the  diminished  demand  of  landlords, 
consequent  on  the  reduction  of  their  rents.  The  same  observa- 
tions apply  to  farmers  and  traders  of  every  description. 

But  it  may  be  said  that  the  capitalist's  income  will  not  be 
increased;  that  the  million  deducted  from  the  landlord's  rent 
will  be  paid  in  additional  wages  to  labourers!  Be  it  so;  this 
will  make  no  difference  in  the  argument:  the  situation  of  the 
society  will  be  improved,  and  they  will  be  able  to  bear  the  same 
money  burthens  with  greater  facility  than  before;  it  will  only 
prove  what  is  still  more  desirable,  that  the  situation  of  another 
class,  and  by  far  the  most  important  class  in  society,  is  the  one 
which  is  chiefly  benefited  by  the  new  distribution.  All  that 
they  receive  more  than  9  millions  forms  part  of  the  net  income 
of  the  country,  and  it  cannot  be  expended  without  adding  to 
its  revenue,  its  happiness,  or  its  power.  Distribute,  then,  the 
net  income  as  you  please.  Give  a  little  more  to  one  class  and 
a  little  less  to  another,  yet  you  do  not  thereby  diminish  it;  a 
greater  amount  of  commodities  will  be  still  produced  with  the 
same  labour,  although  the  amount  of  the  gross  money  value  of 
such  commodities  will  be  diminished ;  but  the  net  money  income 
of  the  country,  that  fund  from  which  taxes  are  paid  and  enjoy- 
ments procured,  would  be  much  more  adequate  than  before 
to  maintain  the  actual  population,  to  afford  it  enjoyments  and 
luxuries,  and  to  support  any  given  amount  of  taxation. 

That  the  stockholder  is  benefited  by  a  great  fall  in  the  value 
of  corn  cannot  be  doubted;  but  if  no  one  else  be  injured,  that 
is  no  reason  why  corn  should  be  made  dear;  for  the  gains  of 
the  stockholder  are  national  gains,  and  increase,  as  all  other 
gains  do,  the  real  wealth  and  power  of  the  country.  If  they  are  un- 
justly benefited,  let  the  degree  in  which  they  are  so  be  accurately 
ascertained,  and  then  it  is  for  the  legislature  to  devise  a  remedy ; 
but  no  policy  can  be  more  unwise  than  to  shut  ourselves  out  from 
the  great  advantages  arising  from  cheap  corn,  and  abundant 

T 


290  Political  Economy 

productions,  merely  because  the  stockholder  would  have'an 
undue  proportion  of  the  increase. 

To  regulate  the  dividends  on  stock  by  the  money  value  of 
corn  has  never  yet  been  attempted.  If  justice  and  good  faith 
required  such  a  regulation,  a  great  debt  is  due  to  the  old  stock- 
holders; for  they  have  been  receiving  the  same  money  dividends 
for  more  than  a  century,  although  com  has,  perhaps,  been 
doubled  or  trebled  in  price. 

But  it  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  situation  of  the 
stockholder  will  be  more  improved  than  that  of  the  farmer,  the 
manufacturer,  and  the  other  capitalists  of  the  country;  it  will, 
in  fact,  be  less  improved. 

The  stockholder  will  undoubtedly  receive  the  same  money 
dividend,  while  not  only  the  price  of  raw  produce  and  labour  fell, 
but  the  prices  of  many  other  things  into  which  raw  produce 
entered  as  a  component  part.  This,  however,  is  an  advantage, 
as  I  have  just  stated,  which  he  would  enjoy  in  common  with  all 
other  persons  who  had  the  same  money  incomes  to  expend: — 
his  money  income  would  not  be  increased;  that  of  the  farmer, 
manufacturer,  and  other  employers  of  labour  would,  and  con- 
sequently they  would  be  doubly  benefited. 

It  may  be  said  that,  although  it  may  be  true  that  capitalists 
would  be  benefited  by  a  rise  of  profits,  in  consequence  of  a  fall 
of  wages,  yet  that  their  incomes  would  be  diminished  by  the 
fall  in  the  money  value  of  their  commodities.  What  is  to 
lower  them?  Not  any  alteration  in  the  value  of  money  for 
nothing  has  been  supposed  to  occur  to  alter  the  value  of  monejg 
Not  any  diminution  in  the  quantity  of  labour  necessary  to  pri 
duce  their  commodities,  for  no  such  cause  has  operated,  and 
it  did  operate,  would  not  lower  money  profits,  though  it  mig 
lower  money  prices.  But  the  raw  produce  of  which  commodities 
are  made  is  supposed  to  have  fallen  in  price,  and,  therefore, 
commodities  will  fall  on  that  account.  True,  they  will  fall,  but 
their  fall  will  not  be  attended  with  any  diminution  in  the  money 
income  of  the  producer.  If  he  sell  his  commodity  for  less  money, 
it  is  only  because  one  of  the  materials  from  which  it  is  made  has 
fallen  in  value.  If  the  clothier  sell  his  cloth  for  £900  instead  of 
£1000,  his  income  will  not  be  less,  if  the  wool  from  which  it  is 
made  has  declined  £100  in  value. 

Mr.  Malthus  says,  "It  is  true  that  the  last  additions  to  the 
agricultural  produce  of  an  improving  country  are  not  attended 
with  a  large  proportion  of  rent;  and  it  is  precisely  this  circum- 
stance that  may  make  it  answer  to  a  rich  country  to  import 


] 


Malthus  on  Rent  291 

some  of  its  com,  if  it  can  be  secure  of  obtaining  an  equable 
supply.  But  in  all  cases  the  importation  of  foreign  corn  must 
fail  to  answer  nationally  if  it  is  not  so  much  cheaper  than  the 
corn  that  can  be  grown  at  home  as  to  equal  both  the  profits 
and  the  rent  of  the  grain  which  it  displaces." — Grounds,  etc., 

P'  36. 

In  this  observation  Mr.  Malthus  is  quite  correct;  but  imported 
corn  must  be  always  so  much  cheaper  than  the  com  that  can  be 
grown  at  home,  "as  to  equal  both  the  profits  and  the  rent  of 
the  grain  which  it  displaces."  If  it  were  not,  no  advantage  to 
any  one  could  be  obtained  by  importing  it. 

As  rent  is  the  effect  of  the  high  price  of  com,  the  loss  of  rent 
is  the  effect  of  a  low  price.  Foreign  com  never  enters  into 
competition  with  such  home  corn  as  affords  a  rent;  the  fall  of 
price  invariably  affects  the  landlord  till  the  whole  of  his  rent 
is  absorbed; — if  it  fall  still  more,  the  price  will  not  afford  even 
the  common  profits  of  stock;  capital  will  then  quit  the  land 
for  some  other  employment,  and  the  com  which  was  before 
grown  upon  it  will  then,  and  not  till  then,  be  imported.  From 
the  loss  of  rent  there  will  be  a  loss  of  value,  of  estimated  money 
value,  but  there  will  be  a  gain  of  wealth.  The  amount  of  the 
raw  produce  and  other  productions  together  will  be  increased; 
from  the  greater  facility  with  which  they  are  produced  they 
will,  though  augmented  in  quality,  be  diminished  in  value. 

Two  men  employ  equal  capitals — one  in  agriculture,  the  other 
in  manufactures.  That  in  agriculture  produces  a  net  annual 
value  of  £1200,  of  which  £1000  is  retained  for  profit  and  ;f2oo 
is  paid  for  rent;  the  other  in  manufactures  produces  only  an 
annual  value  of  jfiooo.  Suppose  that,  by  importation,  the 
same  quantity  of  com  which  cost  £1200  can  be  obtained  for 
commodities  which  cost  £950,  and  that,  in  consequence,  the 
capital  employed  in  agriculture  is  diverted  to  manufactures, 
where  it  can  produce  a  value  of  £1000,  the  net  revenue  of  the 
country  will  be  of  less  value,  it  will  be  reduced  from  £2200  to 
£2000;  but  there  will  not  only  be  the  same  quantity  of  commo- 
dities and  com  for  its  own  consumption,  but  also  as  much  addi- 
tion to  that  quantity  as  £50  would  purchase,  the  difference 
between  the  value  at  which  its  manufactures  were  sold  to  the 
foreign  country  and  the  value  of  the  com  which  was  purchased 
from  it. 

Now  this  is  precisely  the  question  respecting  the  advantage  of 
importing  or  growing  com;  it  never  can  be  imported  till  the 
quantity  obtained  from  abroad  by  the  employment  of  a  given 


■ 


292  Political  Economy 

capital  exceeds  the  quantity  which  the  same  capital  will  enable 
us  to  grow  at  home — exceeds  not  only  that  quantity  which  falls 
to  the  share  of  the  farmer,  but  also  that  which  is  paid  as  rent  to 
the  landlord. 

Mr.  Malthus  says,  "  It  has  been  justly  observed  by  Adam 
Smith  that  no  equal  quantity  of  productive  labour  employed 
in  manufactures  can  ever  occasion  so  great  a  reproduction  as  in 
agriculture."  If  Adam  wSmith  speaks  of  value,  he  is  correct; 
but  if  he  speaks  of  riches,  which  is  the  important  point,  he  is 
mistaken;  for  he  has  himself  defined  riches  to  consist  of  the 
necessaries,  conveniences,  and  enjoyments  of  human  life.  One 
set  of  necessaries  and  conveniences  admits  of  no  comparison 
with  another  set;  value  in  use  cannot  be  measured  by  any  known 
standard;  it  is  differently  estimated  by  different  persons. 